ComplexMCP: Evaluation of LLM Agents in Dynamic, Interdependent, and
Large-Scale Tool Sandbox

Yuanyang Li 1 2 3 Xue Yang 3 Longyue Wang 3 Weihua Luo 3 Hongyang Chen 2 †

1. Introduction

arXiv:2605.10787v2 [cs.AI] 20 May 2026

Abstract

Recently, remarkable progress has been made in large language model (LLM) agents for addressing a wide range of
real-world problems. Some agents can interact with search
engines (Jin et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025a) or web (He et al.,
2024), while others leverage code interpreters (Li et al.,
2025b) to generate and execute code. Remarkably, certain
systems are even capable of autonomously developing a
software (Qian et al., 2024) or conducting entire scientific
research workflows (Lu et al., 2024a).

Current LLM agents are proficient at calling isolated APIs but struggle with the ”last mile” of
commercial software automation. In real-world
scenarios, tools are not independent; they are
atomic, interdependent, and prone to environmental noise. We introduce ComplexMCP, a benchmark designed to evaluate agents in these rigorous
conditions. Built on the Model Context Protocol
(MCP), ComplexMCP provides over 300 systematically validated tools derived from 7 stateful
sandboxes, ranging from office suites to financial
systems. Unlike existing datasets, our benchmark
utilizes a seed-driven architecture to simulate dynamic environment states and unpredictable API
failures, ensuring a deterministic yet diverse evaluation.

Although large language model (LLM) agents have shown
promise in handling certain tool-use tasks, real-world scenarios are often significantly more complex. For instance,
in enterprise software environments, an LLM may need
to navigate hundreds or even thousands of intricate APIs.
These APIs are typically abstract, fine-grained, and exhibit
strong interdependencies—ranging from parameter passing
and state management to access control and authentication.
Moreover, APIs frequently encounter unexpected failures or
edge cases. In such situations, the agent must not only detect
errors but also autonomously adapt its strategy by exploring
alternative pathways to accomplish the task. Compounding
this challenge, it is often impractical to narrow down the
candidate tool set a priori.

We evaluate various LLMs across full-context and
RAG paradigms, revealing a stark performance
gap: even top-tier models fail to exceed a 60% success rate, far trailing human performance (90%+).
Granular trajectory analysis identifies three fundamental bottlenecks: (1) tool retrieval saturation as action spaces scale; (2) over-confidence,
where agents skip essential environment verifications; and (3) strategic defeatism, a tendency
to rationalize failure rather than pursuing recovery. These findings underscore the insufficiency
of current agents for interdependent workflows,
positioning ComplexMCP as a critical testbed
for the next generation of resilient autonomous
systems. The codebase and benchmark implementation are publicly available at https://
github.com/AIDC-AI/complex-mcp.

Despite these practical demands, a critical gap remains in
the research community: the lack of a benchmark that systematically evaluates an agent’s ability to robustly interact
with complex, dynamic environments featuring large-scale,
interrelated tools while demonstrating error resilience. Existing efforts fall short in several key aspects. ToolBench
(Qin et al., 2023) and AnyToolBench (Du et al., 2024) leverage massive collections of real-world RESTful APIs scraped
from the internet, but they do not simulate realistic execution
environments, and the tools provided are largely independent of one another. BFCL (Patil et al., 2025) evaluates toolcalling correctness via abstract syntax tree (AST) matching
without actually invoking real APIs, which improves stability but sacrifices environmental realism. TRAJECT-Bench
(He et al., 2025) emphasizes trajectory-level, fine-grained
evaluation metrics for LLM agent tool use. Meanwhile, τ Bench(Yao et al., 2024) and τ 2 -Bench (Barres et al., 2025)
employ interactive sandboxes; however, they are limited to

1
Zhejiang University 2 Zhejiang Lab 3 Alibaba Group. Correspondence to: Hongyang Chen <hongyang@zhejianglab.org>.

Proceedings of the 43 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Seoul, South Korea. PMLR 306, 2026. Copyright 2026
by the author(s).

1

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes

only two domains and a small number of tools, and their
environments are precisely predefined—lacking the ambiguity and complexity of real-world settings. More recently,
MCPEval (Liu et al., 2025), MCPWorld (Yan et al., 2025),
MCP-Bench (Wang et al., 2025) and LiveMCPBench (Mo
et al., 2025) construct benchmarks based on the Model Context Protocol (MCP) (Hou et al., 2025), requiring agents to
orchestrate multiple tools to complete tasks. Nevertheless,
even in these benchmarks, the individual tools largely remain functionally isolated, with limited or shallow inter-tool
dependencies.

computations (Li et al., 2025b). This tool-augmented architecture enables the agent to interact with its environment in a
grounded and iterative manner. Formally, the agent’s behavior can be viewed as a partially observable Markov decision
process (POMDP), where at each step t, the agent receives
an observation Ot (e.g., user input or tool output) and selects
a language action At+1 based on its history of interactions.
The transition dynamics thus follow a Markovian structure:
the next action depends only on the current observation and
the agent’s internal state, abstractly captured as
LLM

Ot × St −−−→ At+1 ,

To bridge these gaps, we present ComplexMCP, a rigorous
evaluation framework designed to assess LLM agents within
a large-scale, interdependent, and stochastic tool ecosystem.
As summarized in Table 1, ComplexMCP distinguishes
itself from prior work through three core pillars:

with subsequent observations potentially conditioned on At
through tool invocations or environmental feedback. This
loop of observe–reason–act underpins the agent’s ability to
perform extended reasoning and task execution.
2.2. Benchmarking LLM Agents

• Unified MCP Ecosystem: ComplexMCP orchestrates over 150 interdependent tools across 7 stateful
sandboxes plus over 150 stateless APIs. Native to the
Model Context Protocol, these tools require long-chain
reasoning and complex state transitions rather than
isolated calls.

As agentic tasks involve multi-step reasoning, environmental interaction, and tool usage—far surpassing the scope of
standard question answering—the development of rigorous
and representative benchmarks for LLM agents (Yehudai
et al., 2025) has become increasingly critical. Early efforts
such as ToolBench (Qin et al., 2023) evaluate LLMs in
large-scale tool-invocation settings, leveraging thousands
of real-world RESTful APIs collected from the internet.
To assess web-grounded agency, Mind2Web (Deng et al.,
2023) and WebArena (Zhou et al., 2023) introduce handcrafted, browser-like toolsets that require agents to both
reason about and act within realistic web environments.
Subsequent work, including τ -Bench (Yao et al., 2024) and
τ 2 -Bench (Barres et al., 2025), establishes controlled tool
sandboxes to systematically study agent–environment interaction. BFCL (Patil et al., 2025) focuses on validating
correctness in multi-turn API workflows through abstract
syntax tree (AST) matching.

• Seed-Driven Dynamics: A single seed governs both
high-entropy environment initialization and executiontime perturbations (e.g., API failures). This mechanism ensures real-world stochasticity and environmental diversity while maintaining perfect scientific
reproducibility.
• Deterministic Fine-Grained Evaluation: We replace
subjective LLM-based scoring with a rule-based system that compares environment state transitions against
ground truth. This provides objective, fine-grained
metrics to analyze agent failure modes beyond binary
success.

With the growing prevalence of tool use, a standardized
protocol—Model Context Protocol (MCP) (Hou et al.,
2025)—has emerged to unify tool interfaces for LLMs.
Built upon MCP, new benchmarks such as MCPEval (Liu
et al., 2025), MCPWorld (Yan et al., 2025), and MCPBench (Wang et al., 2025) provide consistent, server-based
evaluation frameworks that facilitate fair comparison and
reproducible agent assessment across diverse tool ecosystems.

Conflict of Interest Disclosure. Authors Y.L., X.Y., L.W.,
and W.L. are affiliated with Alibaba Group, where this work
was conducted. Alibaba Group is involved in the development of Qwen-3-Max, which was among the models
evaluated in this paper.

2. Related Work
2.1. LLM Agents

3. ComplexMCP

Building on Yao et al. (Yao et al., 2022), LLM agents operate
by generating language-based actions that adhere to predefined formats, allowing them to invoke external tools—such
as web search APIs for retrieving unknown information (Li
et al., 2025a) or code interpreters for executing complex

3.1. Problem Formalization
We formalize the task of evaluating LLM agents in complex
tool environments as a Seed-driven Goal-oriented Trajectory problem. Unlike traditional stateless tool-calling bench2

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes
Table 1. Comparison of ComplexMCP with representative tool-use benchmarks. Our benchmark is the only one that simultaneously
integrates a large-scale toolset with stateful, stochastic, and dynamic environments under a unified MCP-native architecture.
Large-scale
Toolset

MCP
Native

Stateful
Sandbox

Seed-driven
Diversity

Environmental
Stochasticity

Deterministic
Evaluation

ToolBench (Qin et al., 2023)
ToolSandbox (Lu et al., 2024b)
τ -Bench (Yao et al., 2024)
BFCL (Patil et al., 2025)
MCPEval (Liu et al., 2025)
MCP-Bench (Wang et al., 2025)
LiveMCPBench (Mo et al., 2025)

✓
✗
✗
✓
✗
✓
✓

✗
✗
✗
✗
✓
✓
✓

✗
✓
✓
✗
✗
✗
✗

✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗

✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✓

✗
✓
✓
✓
✗
✗
✗

ComplexMCP (Ours)

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

Benchmark

marks, our environment emphasizes stateful transitions and
interdependence between atomic tools.

This mechanism guarantees that while the environment
structure remains consistent, the specific instances (e.g.,
the existence of a user or their specific permissions) vary
entirely across different seeds; this decoupling of environment logic from its content forces the agent to dynamically
perceive the environment through active tool-use rather than
relying on hard-coded heuristics.

Environment Definition We define a ComplexMCP task
as a tuple M = ⟨S, T , I, σ, G, Φ⟩, where:
• S is the state space representing the environment of
the software sandbox.

Interdependence and Trajectory The agent interacts
with the environment over H steps, selecting actions at =
LLM(I, {(ai , oi )}t−1
i=1 ). Each execution is subject to seeddriven stochasticity η(σ), simulating real-world perturbations like network latency or transient errors. Crucially,
tools are interdependent: a tool tj is only valid if the current state st contains specific attributes v produced by a
preceding tool ti . The agent’s objective is to generate a
trajectory τ such that the terminal state sH satisfies the goal
G under the evaluation metric Φ. The evaluation metric will
be discussed later.

• T = {t1 , t2 , . . . , tn } is the toolset consisting of n
atomic MCP-based tools. Each tool t ∈ T is a function
t : S × A → S × O, where A is the argument space
and O is the observation space.
• I is the natural language instruction provided by the
user, specifying the high-level objective.
• σ ∈ Z+ is the random seed that deterministically
controls the environment’s stochasticity.
• G is the goal state or a set of conditions that S must
satisfy upon completion.

3.2. The ComplexMCP Ecosystem

• Φ is the evaluation function that maps the final environment state and the action trajectory to a fine-grained
score.

ComplexMCP is built entirely upon the Model Context
Protocol (MCP) (Hou et al., 2025), providing a standardized interface that decouples tool implementation from the
agent’s reasoning logic. Our ecosystem integrates two distinct server paradigms to simulate diverse operational scenarios. The whole workflow of ComplexMCP is illustrated
in Figure 1.

Seed-driven State Instantiation To ensure environmental
diversity and reproducibility, ComplexMCP employs a seeddriven instantiation mechanism. The initial state s0 ∈ S is
derived via a deterministic mapping finit : (σ, C) → S.

Stateless MCP Servers. These servers facilitate functional,
independent operations such as mathematical computations,
unit conversions, etc. They do not persist data between
calls; each request is processed in isolation, representing the
”atomic” tools common in existing benchmarks.

Specifically, C represents a large-scale Synthetic Knowledge Base comprising diverse entities (e.g., user profiles,
message histories, stock tickers) pre-generated by LLMs
to mimic real-world distribution. During initialization, the
seed σ parameterizes a pseudo-random number generator
(PRNG), such that:
s0 = Sample(C; PRNG(σ))

Stateful MCP Servers. To emulate the intricacies of
real-world software ecosystems, we introduce stateful
servers that maintain a persistent environment state S

(1)
3

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes

Figure 1. The Overview of ComplexMCP: Our framework integrates stateful sandboxes and stateless MCP servers via a seed-driven
mechanism.

throughout each agent rollout. This state is instantiated as a high-dimensional, nested dictionary that serves
as a unified session store, encompassing chat history,
trade history, and more. Any action at yielding side effects—such as dispatching a message or modifying a shopping cart—triggers a deterministic state transition St+1 =
f (St , at ). Our framework comprises seven integrated
applications: LightOS, LightTalk, LightShop,
LightWeather, LightFlight, LightStock, and
LightNews (see details in B.1). Collectively, these applications provide a rich set of over 150 interdependent
tools. A representative topology of these dependencies is
illustrated in Figure 2.

Figure 2. A partial visualization of the inter-tool dependency network within the LightTalk application (showing only a selected
subset of tools for clarity). Arrows denote prerequisite relationships and data flows. For example, a successful ”send message”
operation in complex scenarios may necessitate a multi-step execution trajectory (highlighted in green): initiating network acceleration, resolving the target UID, verifying/lifting contact blocks
and requiring privilege.

3.3. Deterministic Fine-Grained Evaluation
In ComplexMCP, we introduce a deterministic, fine-grained
evaluation framework. To ensure objectivity and reproducibility, our assessment is entirely rule-based, eliminating
the stochasticity and potential bias inherent in LLM-as-ajudge approaches.

The total number of required changes (T ) is the count of
elements that must be modified to reach the ground truth:

The environment state (software configuration or status) is
represented as a nested dictionary. Let envold denote the
initial state, envgt the ground-truth target state, and envnew
the state updated by the agent. We define the following
metrics based on key-path trajectories (k1 , k2 , . . . , kj ):

T =

X

h
i
I envgt (k1 , . . . , kj ) ̸= envold (k1 , . . . , kj )

k1 ,...,kj ∈K

(2)
Where K denotes the set of key-path trajectories considered
4

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes

in the comparison; keys such as timestamps or randomly
generated identifiers, which do not affect the correctness of
the output, are excluded.
The number of correctly modified elements (M ) measures
successful updates:
h
X
M=
I envgt (k1 , . . . , kj ) ̸= envold (k1 , . . . , kj )
k1 ,...,kj ∈K

i
∧ envgt (k1 , . . . , kj ) = envnew (k1 , . . . , kj )
(3)
The number of misbehaving elements (Mb ) quantifies unintended side effects or ”collateral damage” to states that
should have remained unchanged:
h
X
Mb =
I envgt (k1 , . . . , kj ) = envold (k1 , . . . , kj )
k1 ,...,kj ∈K

i Figure 3. Distribution of task complexity within the instruction set.
∧ envgt (k1 , . . . , kj ) ̸= envnew (k1 , . . . , kj ) (Top) Number of unique tools required per instruction; (Bottom)
Total frequency of tool invocations within the ground-truth trajectories.

(4)
Based on these counts, we define the Completion Rate (Rc )
and the Misbehaving Rate (Rb ) as follows:
Rc =

M
,
T

Rb =

Mb
T

4. Experiments
We conduct a comprehensive evaluation of representative
state-of-the-art commercial large language models (LLMs)
to assess their performance on the ComplexMCP benchmark. The evaluated models include GPT-4o (Hurst et al.,
2024), GPT-5 (Singh et al., 2025), the Gemini series (2.5Pro, 3-Pro, and 3-Flash) (Comanici et al., 2025; Google
DeepMind, 2025a;b), the Claude series (Sonnet-3.5, 4, 4.5,
and Opus-4) (Anthropic, a;b), the Llama-3 series (Dubey
et al., 2024), Qwen3-Max (Yang et al., 2025), DeepSeekV3 (Liu et al., 2024), Kimi-K2 (Team et al., 2025), and
GLM-4.7 (Zeng et al., 2025).

(5)

A trajectory is considered correct if and only if the agent
achieves a full completion rate (Rc = 1) with no misbehaving actions (Rb = 0).
3.4. Instruction Set Construction
To rigorously evaluate the reasoning and planning capabilities of LLM agents, we manually curated a high-quality
instruction set consisting of 47 diverse tasks. Each task is accompanied by a meticulously annotated ground-truth trajectory to facilitate objective assessment. A key feature of our
dataset is that while each instruction necessitates the coordination of multiple tools to fulfill complex requirements, no
explicit hints or tool names are provided within the queries.
This design forces agents to rely entirely on their internal
reasoning and environment perception to identify and invoke
the appropriate tools. Furthermore, we have structured each
task to ensure a unique, deterministic outcome, thereby guaranteeing the reproducibility and reliability of our evaluation
framework.

4.1. Main Results
The ”Full-Context” Performance Adopting the ReAct
paradigm (Yao et al., 2022) as our foundational prompting strategy, we evaluate the selected models across all 47
test scenarios and quantify their performance through multiple dimensions. Beyond standard task success metrics, we
meticulously profile the interaction dynamics by recording
tool call statistics and token consumption.
Specifically, we categorize tool interactions into three distinct types to better understand model failure modes: (1)
Valid Invocations: Calls that strictly adhere to the expected
schema and successfully trigger the intended logic. (2) Execution Failures: Invocations that are syntactically correct
(proper function name and arguments) but fail during execution due to environmental constraints or logical errors, such

The tasks in our instruction set exhibit significant complexity; as illustrated in Figure 3, the most challenging scenarios
require coordination across more than 30 distinct tools and
involve over 60 total invocations within the gold-standard
execution path.
5

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes

as querying a non-existent UID or attempting an unauthorized transaction. (3) Syntactic Errors: Malformed calls
characterized by hallucinated tool names or arguments that
violate the predefined schema.

input, the prompt-side input cost can be approximated as
Lp · cuncached + 11Lp · ccached ,
with a total prompt token volume of about 12 × Lp ≈
360,000 tokens. Therefore, although caching substantially
lowers the per-token price of repeated context, the aggregate
volume of cached prompt tokens remains enormous. More
importantly, these repeated tokens still contribute heavily to
the prefill stage at every turn, creating considerable runtime
overhead in addition to non-negligible cumulative cost. As
illustrated in Figure 4, prompt repetition remains the dominant source of total input volume under the ”full-context”
ReAct strategy.

The comprehensive evaluation results are summarized in
Table 2. As shown, Gemini-3-Flash (Google DeepMind,
2025b) achieves the highest success rate at 55.31%, still far
below the human performance of 93.61%.
For the human baseline, we recruited three volunteers with
extensive experience in LLM agents. To keep the comparison fair, they used the same MCP interface as the models,
manually calling tools through terminal commands, and
were given exactly the same instructions and tool documentation, with no extra hints. Each volunteer had only
one attempt per task and solved each problem from scratch.
We evaluated success with the same deterministic state-diff
evaluator used for the models.

(a) Token Count Distribution
5.4%
2.8%

Notably, the top-tier model GPT-5.1 performs only moderately on this benchmark. We observed that GPT-5.1 often
fails to recover from token errors and instead politely gives
up. We discuss this behavior further in Section 4.2.

Prompt

LLM Generation

Tool Feedback

901

1,750

3.6%

87.1%

Token Categories
Tool Feedback

LLM Generation

Figure 4. Distribution of token volume and estimated costs for
Gemini-3-Flash under the ”full-context” ReAct strategy.

Scaling Down the Action Space: Does API Retriever
Help? To mitigate action-space explosion and thus reduce
prompt overhead, prior works like ToolLLM (Qin et al.,
2023) and RAG-MCP (Gan & Sun, 2025) employ kNNbased retrieval (Peterson, 2009) to fetch semantically relevant APIs. However, we investigate whether such semanticdriven methods can capture the latent dependencies and
prerequisite tools essential to ComplexMCP. We evaluate
this strategy across representative models to assess the tradeoff between efficiency and logical integrity. To evaluate
this retrieval-based strategy, we consider two variants: a
standard RAG approach and an iterative RAG framework:

We observe that even with the asymmetric pricing of modern LLM APIs (e.g., Gemini-3-Flash (Google DeepMind,
2025b)), where input tokens are significantly cheaper than
output tokens (e.g., cached input, uncached input, and output
tokens are priced approximately at a 0.1:1:6 ratio), the cumulative prompt overhead remains the dominant economic
driver. For a task requiring 11 tool-calling rounds, the initial prompt is billed 12 times, effectively magnifying its
cost by an order of magnitude. Specifically, the average
per-component token length is distributed as follows:

29,964

9.3%

91.9%

The Token Bottleneck The ReAct paradigm, by design, mirrors multi-turn dialogues where the entire trajectory—including reasoning traces and tool outputs—is resubmitted as input at each iterative step. This leads to a
compounding effect where the initial system prompt and
early-turn history are consumed repeatedly. In our ”fullcontext” baseline evaluation, we populate the system prompt
with comprehensive descriptions for over 300 tools (approximately 30,000 tokens).

Prompt

(b) Estimated Cost Distribution

• RAG: We embed the question and retrieve the top-k
most semantically relevant tools. These tools are then
injected into the LLM’s system prompt as the initial
action space.
• Iterative RAG: Rather than performing retrieval upfront, we equip the LLM with a special tool named
retrieve tools. This tool accepts a natural language search query and an integer k as inputs, dynamically fetching and returning the descriptions of the k
most relevant tools based on the LLM’s current reasoning needs.

Crucially, while the unique content size remains constant,
the actual consumption is significantly amplified by the ReAct trajectory. For an average of 11 tool-calling iterations
(12 model invocations), the static prompt of length Lp is submitted 12 times. If the first occurrence is billed as uncached
input and the remaining 11 repetitions are billed as cached
6

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes
Table 2. Overall evaluation results of different LLMs on ComplexMCP. We report task performance, execution efficiency, and resource
consumption, averaged across the 47 manually curated test scenarios. Each model was independently run three times. For the Task
Performance metrics, we report the mean ± standard deviation across the three runs.
Models

Task Performance (%)

Tool Call Statistics

Token Length

Success
Rate ↑

Completion
Rate (Rc ) ↑

Misbehaving
Rate (Rb ) ↓

Valid
Invocations

Invalid
Invocations

Syntactic
Errors

LLM
Output

Tool
Response

GPT-4o
GPT-5.1

14.89 ± 0.00
19.14 ± 1.74

26.67 ± 0.73
24.63 ± 1.87

2.64 ± 0.13
1.42 ± 0.47

3.94
2.55

0.85
0.31

0.02
0.02

351
215

788
265

Gemini-2.5-pro
Gemini-3-flash
Gemini-3-pro

24.81 ± 2.01
55.31 ± 0.00
44.67 ± 1.74

42.87 ± 1.90
85.79 ± 0.50
81.22 ± 0.51

4.23 ± 0.57
4.39 ± 0.19
7.44 ± 2.84

6.83
10.23
9.40

0.81
0.68
0.70

0.06
0
0.02

584
901
871

878
1750
1046

Claude-sonnet-3.5
Claude-sonnet-4
Claude-sonnet-4.5
Claude-opus-4

26.26 ± 2.01
38.29 ± 1.74
39.71 ± 1.00
41.84 ± 2.01

54.36 ± 2.54
75.78 ± 0.63
76.51 ± 1.73
75.48 ± 1.67

7.72 ± 1.54
8.34 ± 2.30
5.86 ± 0.33
7.43 ± 0.32

6.89
10.09
9.57
9.12

0.77
0.91
0.65
0.74

0
0
0
0

960
913
552
925

874
706
911
521

Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct
Llama-3.1-405B-Instruct

8.51 ± 0.00
21.89 ± 1.00
26.94 ± 1.00

25.60 ± 0.81
53.25 ± 2.60
59.44 ± 0.48

14.88 ± 1.66
5.72 ± 0.37
8.53 ± 1.21

18.70
6.25
6.19

6.55
2.06
1.31

6.46
0.15
0.57

1829
634
726

1596
593
320

Qwen-3-max

31.20 ± 1.00

64.10 ± 2.10

6.34 ± 0.11

8.45

0.95

0

771

1410

DeepSeek-V3

19.86 ± 1.00

35.77 ± 2.86

3.27 ± 0.19

4.53

1.44

0.09

371

748

Kimi-K2

26.22 ± 2.65

54.23 ± 0.75

6.35 ± 0.42

7.66

1.23

0.04

938

727

GLM-4.7

42.55 ± 0.00

72.07 ± 2.46

10.89 ± 1.05

9.00

0.89

0.06

337

1163

Human

93.61 ± 1.74

97.73 ± 1.18

0.81 ± 0.27

10.11

0.51

0

-

-

We adopt the all-MiniLM-L6-v2 sentence transformer
(Reimers & Gurevych, 2019) as our embedding model for
both retrieval strategies.
We evaluate two RAG strategies across two LLMs: Gemini3-flash (Google DeepMind, 2025b) and Claude-opus-4 (Anthropic, b). Task performance, average tool call statistics,
and token consumption per query are summarized in Table 3. As illustrated, Iterative RAG achieves the highest
performance with the lowest token consumption among the
retrieval-based baselines. However, these vector-retrievalbased RAG methods still do not match the performance of
the full-context method. This gap likely stems from the interdependencies between tools in ComplexMCP, which make
it difficult to retrieve ”latent” tools. Specifically, without a
comprehensive view of the full API set, the LLM may fail
to invoke essential intermediate steps that are not explicitly
surfaced by the retrieval mechanism.

Figure 5. Distribution of challenge patterns identified through
trajectory analysis.

Tool Retrieval Saturation A significant bottleneck in
early LLM agents was ”tool forgetting,” where performance
degraded as the action space expanded. As the number
of available tools increases, the overhead of processing
extensive definitions often exceeds the model’s effective
context window or dilutes its attentional focus. To investigate this phenomenon, we evaluated four models—GPT4o, DeepSeek-V3, Gemini-3-Flash, and Claude-Opus4—across a spectrum of distractor tools ranging from zero to
the full set. Our results confirm that while recent SOTA models (e.g., Gemini-3-Flash and Claude-Opus-4) have largely
mitigated this through enhanced long-context processing,
others (e.g., GPT-4o and DeepSeek-V3) still suffer from cognitive overload when candidates exceed 300, as evidenced
by the marked decline in their success and completion rates

4.2. Challenge Analysis
Through a granular analysis of execution trajectories, we
identify several recurring failure patterns that persist even
in state-of-the-art (SOTA) models, as shown in Figure 5.
These challenges highlight the gap between current LLM
capabilities and the requirements of complex, real-world
agentic tasks.

7

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes
Table 3. Comparison of task performance, average tool call statistics, and token length for Gemini-3-flash and Claude-opus-4 using
various RAG strategies. Each model was independently run three times. For the Task Performance metrics, results are reported as mean ±
standard deviation across the three runs.
Task Performance (%)

Methods

Gemini-3-flash
(RAG, k=30)
Gemini-3-flash
(RAG, k=60)
Gemini-3-flash
(Iterative RAG)
Claude-opus-4
(RAG, k=30)
Claude-opus-4
(RAG, k=60)
Claude-opus-4
(Iterative RAG)

Tool Call Statistics

Token Length

Success
Rate ↑

Completion
Rate (Rc ) ↑

Misbehaving
Rate (Rb ) ↓

Valid
Invocations

Invalid
Invocations

Syntactic
Errors

Prompt

LLM
Output

Tool
Response

13.47 ± 2.01

22.23 ± 2.25

2.82 ± 0.68

9.46

6.45

0.55

3544

828

4703

27.65 ± 1.74

41.96 ± 1.33

2.97 ± 0.41

13.63

3.38

0.60

6795

543

4645

36.88 ± 2.01

70.89 ± 1.02

5.93 ± 0.66

13.21

1.63

0.04

334

465

4322

11.34 ± 2.01

21.74 ± 2.83

2.26 ± 0.10

4.77

3.09

0.34

4113

654

3215

24.82 ± 2.65

41.34 ± 1.21

3.62 ± 0.50

6.97

3.21

0.09

7926

769

3494

25.52 ± 1.74

54.40 ± 2.63

5.61 ± 0.30

11.57

1.36

0

358

872

3473

GPT-4o

Gemini-3-Flash

(see Figure 6).
DeepSeek-V3

(a) Success Rate
70

40
30
20

60

Rate (%)

50

Rate (%)

Accuracy (%)

8

80

60

40

0

50

100

Number of Distractor Tools

All (300+)

0

6
4
2

20

10

(c) Misbehaving Rate (Rb)

10

100

80

0

Claude-Opus-4

(b) Completion Rate (Rc)

0

50

100

Number of Distractor Tools

All (300+)

0

0

50

100

Number of Distractor Tools

Figure 7. An illustration of the ”over-confidence” failure mode.
The agent ignores the pre-existing environmental state (the banana)
and skips necessary cleanup steps (dashed path), taking an erroneous shortcut (red path) to checkout.

All (300+)

Figure 6. Scaling analysis of agent robustness against distractor
tools. As the number of irrelevant tools increases, Success Rate (a)
and Completion Rate Rc (b) decline for several models, illustrating
the tool retrieval saturation bottleneck.

for models to abort tasks prematurely upon encountering
transient tool errors. Instead of retrying or invoking compensatory tools, models often misattribute recoverable glitches
as terminal obstacles. This failure mode is remarkably
prominent in GPT-5 (Singh et al., 2025). Despite its superior
reasoning capabilities, the model frequently leverages its
linguistic fluency to rationalize failure rather than pursuing
fallback strategies (see Appendix C.2.1). Consequently, this
”polite surrender” prevents GPT-5 from achieving high success rates, leading to its surprisingly mediocre performance
on our benchmark.

The ”Clean-Slate” Bias and Over-confidence The most
pervasive and challenging failure mode identified in our
benchmark is what we term the ”Clean-Slate” Bias. LLMs
frequently exhibit over-confidence by assuming the environment is initialized to a default or empty state. In real-world
scenarios, however, environments are often ”messy”—for
instance, a shopping cart might already contain unpaid
items from a previous session, or a network might have
pre-existing proxy settings.
We observe that models consistently bypass stateverification steps (e.g., checking the current contents of a
cart, see in Figure 7) and proceed directly to execution (e.g.,
adding new items and checking out). This lack of proactive environment sensing leads to unintended consequences,
such as purchasing redundant products. This bias suggests
that current agents are ”proactive executors” rather than
”perceptive planners,” struggling to reconcile their internal
plan with a dynamic, non-empty environment state.

5. Limitations and Future Work
Although ComplexMCP provides a robust benchmark for
evaluating LLM agents in stateful environments, it currently
features a curated set of 47 high-quality instructions. This
scale is a deliberate trade-off to ensure the absolute determinism and logical integrity of the evaluation. Unlike
benchmarks that rely on automated generation, each task in
ComplexMCP necessitates manual expert mapping of intricate tool interdependencies and the meticulous annotation
of ground-truth trajectories. This rigorous, labor-intensive

Strategic Defeatism in Error Recovery Beyond overconfidence, we identify Strategic Defeatism: a tendency
8

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes

Acknowledgement

process is essential to provide the fine-grained, state-based
metrics required for reliable agent assessment, albeit at a
higher cost of time and human effort.

We gratefully acknowledge the support of Alibaba Group
for this research. We also sincerely appreciate the valuable
discussions and insightful feedback from our colleagues and
collaborators at Alibaba Group, which have significantly
improved the quality of this work. In addition, this research
was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62271452.

In future work, we plan to significantly expand the instruction set by incorporating a wider variety of multi-domain
scenarios. By scaling the task diversity while maintaining
our stringent manual verification standards, we aim to further enhance the evaluative power of ComplexMCP and
provide an even more comprehensive testbed for the next
generation of autonomous agents.

References
Anthropic. Introducing claude 3.5 sonnet, a.
https://www.anthropic.com/news/
claude-3-5-sonnet.

6. Conclusion
In this work, we introduced ComplexMCP, a rigorous
benchmark designed to evaluate LLM agents within largescale, interdependent, and stochastic tool ecosystems. By
leveraging the Model Context Protocol (MCP) and a seeddriven dynamic architecture, we provide a deterministic yet
realistic testbed for assessing the ”last mile” of software
automation. Our comprehensive evaluation reveals a significant performance gap between state-of-the-art models
and human performance, highlighting critical failure modes
such as the ”Clean-Slate” bias and the difficulty of navigating latent tool interdependencies. Furthermore, our analysis
of RAG strategies demonstrates that while iterative retrieval
improves efficiency, it remains inferior to full-context methods in capturing implicit tool dependencies. We believe
ComplexMCP serves as a vital resource for the community,
steering the development of the next generation of robust,
perceptive, and truly autonomous agents capable of handling
the complexities of real-world software environments.

URL

Anthropic. Introducing claude 4, b. URL https://www.
anthropic.com/news/claude-4.
Barres, V., Dong, H., Ray, S., Si, X., and Narasimhan, K.
tau2-bench: Evaluating conversational agents in a dualcontrol environment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07982,
2025.
Comanici, G., Bieber, E., Schaekermann, M., Pasupat, I.,
Sachdeva, N., Dhillon, I., Blistein, M., Ram, O., Zhang,
D., Rosen, E., et al. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier
with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context,
and next generation agentic capabilities. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2507.06261, 2025.
Deng, X., Gu, Y., Zheng, B., Chen, S., Stevens, S., Wang,
B., Sun, H., and Su, Y. Mind2web: Towards a generalist agent for the web. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 36:28091–28114, 2023.

Impact Statement

Du, Y., Wei, F., and Zhang, H. Anytool: Self-reflective,
hierarchical agents for large-scale api calls. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.04253, 2024.

This paper introduces ComplexMCP, a benchmark designed
to advance the development of robust and autonomous LLM
agents in complex software environments. By providing a
rigorous, seed-driven sandbox with interdependent tools and
stochastic dynamics, our work directly contributes to the
reliability and safety of AI systems intended for real-world
automation. The identification of critical failure modes,
such as the ”Clean-Slate” bias, provides a clear roadmap
for the research community to develop agents that are more
perceptive and cautious, thereby reducing the risk of unintended actions or data corruption in enterprise and financial
systems. Furthermore, by adopting the Model Context Protocol (MCP), we promote the standardization of tool-use
interfaces, facilitating more transparent, reproducible, and
interoperable AI research across the industry.

Dubey, A., Jauhri, A., Pandey, A., Kadian, A., Al-Dahle,
A., Letman, A., Mathur, A., Schelten, A., Yang, A., Fan,
A., et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv e-prints, pp.
arXiv–2407, 2024.
Gan, T. and Sun, Q. Rag-mcp: Mitigating prompt bloat
in llm tool selection via retrieval-augmented generation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.03275, 2025.
Google DeepMind. Gemini 3 pro, 2025a. URL https:
//deepmind.google/models/gemini/pro/.
Google DeepMind. Gemini 3 flash, 2025b.
https://deepmind.google/models/
gemini/flash/.

URL

He, H., Yao, W., Ma, K., Yu, W., Dai, Y., Zhang, H., Lan,
Z., and Yu, D. Webvoyager: Building an end-to-end
9

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes

web agent with large multimodal models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.13919, 2024.

Mo, G., Zhong, W., Chen, J., Chen, X., Lu, Y., Lin, H.,
He, B., Han, X., and Sun, L. Livemcpbench: Can
agents navigate an ocean of mcp tools? arXiv preprint
arXiv:2508.01780, 2025.

He, P., Dai, Z., He, B., Liu, H., Tang, X., Lu, H., Li, J.,
Ding, J., Mukherjee, S., Wang, S., et al. Traject-bench: A
trajectory-aware benchmark for evaluating agentic tool
use. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.04550, 2025.

Patil, S. G., Mao, H., Yan, F., Ji, C. C.-J., Suresh, V., Stoica,
I., and Gonzalez, J. E. The berkeley function calling
leaderboard (bfcl): From tool use to agentic evaluation
of large language models. In Forty-second International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2025.

Hou, X., Zhao, Y., Wang, S., and Wang, H. Model context
protocol (mcp): Landscape, security threats, and future
research directions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.23278,
2025.

Peterson, L. E. K-nearest neighbor. Scholarpedia, 4(2):
1883, 2009.

Hurst, A., Lerer, A., Goucher, A. P., Perelman, A., Ramesh,
A., Clark, A., Ostrow, A., Welihinda, A., Hayes, A.,
Radford, A., et al. Gpt-4o system card. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.21276, 2024.

Qian, C., Liu, W., Liu, H., Chen, N., Dang, Y., Li, J., Yang,
C., Chen, W., Su, Y., Cong, X., et al. Chatdev: Communicative agents for software development. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp.
15174–15186, 2024.

Jin, B., Zeng, H., Yue, Z., Yoon, J., Arik, S., Wang, D.,
Zamani, H., and Han, J. Search-r1: Training llms to
reason and leverage search engines with reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.09516, 2025.

Qin, Y., Liang, S., Ye, Y., Zhu, K., Yan, L., Lu, Y., Lin, Y.,
Cong, X., Tang, X., Qian, B., et al. Toolllm: Facilitating
large language models to master 16000+ real-world apis.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.16789, 2023.

Langley, P. Crafting papers on machine learning. In Langley,
P. (ed.), Proceedings of the 17th International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML 2000), pp. 1207–1216, Stanford, CA, 2000. Morgan Kaufmann.

Reimers, N. and Gurevych, I. Sentence-bert: Sentence
embeddings using siamese bert-networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.10084, 2019.

Li, X., Dong, G., Jin, J., Zhang, Y., Zhou, Y., Zhu, Y., Zhang,
P., and Dou, Z. Search-o1: Agentic search-enhanced
large reasoning models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.05366,
2025a.

Singh, A., Fry, A., Perelman, A., Tart, A., Ganesh, A.,
El-Kishky, A., McLaughlin, A., Low, A., Ostrow, A.,
Ananthram, A., Nathan, A., Luo, A., Helyar, A., Madry,
A., Efremov, A., et al. Openai gpt-5 system card, 2025.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.03267.

Li, X., Zou, H., and Liu, P. Torl: Scaling tool-integrated rl.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.23383, 2025b.
Liu, A., Feng, B., Xue, B., Wang, B., Wu, B., Lu, C., Zhao,
C., Deng, C., Zhang, C., Ruan, C., et al. Deepseek-v3
technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19437, 2024.

Team, K., Bai, Y., Bao, Y., Chen, G., Chen, J., Chen,
N., Chen, R., Chen, Y., Chen, Y., Chen, Y., et al.
Kimi k2: Open agentic intelligence. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2507.20534, 2025.

Liu, Z., Qiu, J., Wang, S., Zhang, J., Liu, Z., Ram, R., Chen,
H., Yao, W., Heinecke, S., Savarese, S., et al. Mcpeval: Automatic mcp-based deep evaluation for ai agent
models. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System
Demonstrations, pp. 373–402, 2025.

Wang, Z., Chang, Q., Patel, H., Biju, S., Wu, C.-E., Liu,
Q., Ding, A., Rezazadeh, A., Shah, A., Bao, Y., et al.
Mcp-bench: Benchmarking tool-using llm agents with
complex real-world tasks via mcp servers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2508.20453, 2025.
Yan, Y., Wang, S., Du, J., Yang, Y., Shan, Y., Qiu, Q., Jia, X.,
Wang, X., Yuan, X., Han, X., et al. Mcpworld: A unified
benchmarking testbed for api, gui, and hybrid computer
use agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07672, 2025.

Lu, C., Lu, C., Lange, R. T., Foerster, J., Clune, J., and Ha,
D. The ai scientist: Towards fully automated open-ended
scientific discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06292,
2024a.

Yang, A., Li, A., Yang, B., Zhang, B., Hui, B., Zheng, B.,
Yu, B., Gao, C., Huang, C., Lv, C., et al. Qwen3 technical
report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388, 2025.

Lu, J., Holleis, T., Zhang, Y., Aumayer, B., Nan, F., Bai,
F., Ma, S., Ma, S., Li, M., Yin, G., Wang, Z., and Pang,
R. Toolsandbox: A stateful, conversational, interactive
evaluation benchmark for llm tool use capabilities, 2024b.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.04682.

Yao, S., Zhao, J., Yu, D., Du, N., Shafran, I., Narasimhan,
K. R., and Cao, Y. React: Synergizing reasoning and
10

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes

acting in language models. In The eleventh international
conference on learning representations, 2022.
Yao, S., Shinn, N., Razavi, P., and Narasimhan, K. taubench: A benchmark for tool-agent-user interaction in
real-world domains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12045,
2024.
Yehudai, A., Eden, L., Li, A., Uziel, G., Zhao, Y., BarHaim, R., Cohan, A., and Shmueli-Scheuer, M. Survey on evaluation of llm-based agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.16416, 2025.
Zeng, A., Lv, X., Zheng, Q., Hou, Z., Chen, B., Xie, C.,
Wang, C., Yin, D., Zeng, H., Zhang, J., et al. Glm-4.5:
Agentic, reasoning, and coding (arc) foundation models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.06471, 2025.
Zhou, S., Xu, F. F., Zhu, H., Zhou, X., Lo, R., Sridhar, A.,
Cheng, X., Ou, T., Bisk, Y., Fried, D., et al. Webarena:
A realistic web environment for building autonomous
agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13854, 2023.

11

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes

A. LLM Agent Prompts
The system prompts employed by LLM Agents for both the full-context strategy and the two RAG-based strategies are
presented below.

Full-context System Prompt:
You are an AI assistant with access to a set of tools (APIs). When you need to use
a tool, invoke it by outputting a JSON object enclosed by <tool> and </tool> in the
following format:
<tool>
{"name":
</tool>

"tool name", "arguments":

{"arg1":

value1, "arg2":

value2, ...}}

After you submit the tool call in this format, I will execute it and return the
result to you. Below is the list of available tools and their descriptions:
$ALL TOOLS

RAG System Prompt:
You are an AI assistant with access to a set of tools (APIs). When you need to use
a tool, invoke it by outputting a JSON object enclosed by <tool> and </tool> in the
following format:
<tool>
{"name":
</tool>

"tool name", "arguments":

{"arg1":

value1, "arg2":

value2, ...}}

After you submit the tool call in this format, I will execute it and return the
result to you. Below is the list of available tools and their descriptions:
$RETRIEVED TOOLS(query, topk)

Iterative RAG System Prompt:
You are an AI assistant with access to a set of tools (APIs). When you need to use
a tool, invoke it by outputting a JSON object enclosed by <tool> and </tool> in the
following format:
<tool>
{"name":
</tool>

"tool name", "arguments":

{"arg1":

value1, "arg2":

value2, ...}}

After you submit the tool call in this format, I will execute it and return the
result to you. Below is the list of available tools and their descriptions:
- {’tool name’: ’retrieve tools’, ’description’: ’As there are too many tools
available, use this tool to find the most relevant tools based on your query and a
requested number k.’, ’arguments’: {’query’: {’type’: ’str’, ’description’: "A
description of the task or requirements used to find relevant tools (e.g. ’I need
to add two numbers’; ’I want to know that time is it now’)"}, ’k’: {’type’: ’int’,
’description’: ’Maximum number of the most relevant tools to return’}}, ’returns’:
{’type’: ’list’, ’description’: ’A list of up to k tools most relevant to the
provided query’}}

12

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes

B. Tool Set
ComplexMCP encompasses a diverse ecosystem of 15 MCP servers, providing a total of 315 distinct tools. These servers
are categorized into 7 stateful servers, which maintain persistent environment states and side effects, and 8 stateless
servers, which handle independent functional operations. The following sections provide detailed specifications for these
components.
B.1. Stateful Servers
Stateful servers simulate realistic software environments where tool invocations depend on and modify the underlying
system state.
B.1.1. L IGHT OS
Description LightOS serves as the foundational operating layer for all other stateful applications within the sandbox.
It acts as a central coordinator, providing a unified virtualized temporal reference (pseudo-timestamp) for all integrated
services to ensure temporal consistency across complex interaction trajectories.
• now()
Returns an ISO-formatted timestamp string. To ensure scientific reproducibility, the virtual time is deterministically
derived from the initialized environment seed.
• health()
Performs a system-level diagnostic check and returns a boolean value indicating whether the operating system and its
dependent services are functioning nominally.
B.1.2. L IGHT TALK
Description LightTalk simulates a multi-functional social platform requiring complex state management. It emphasizes tool interdependencies, such as the prerequisite of resolving UIDs before interaction and the necessity of network
optimization for latency-sensitive tasks.
• get my uid()
Retrieves the unique identifier (UID) of the currently authenticated agent.
• get my name()
Retrieves the display name of the current agent’s session.
• get all contacts()
Fetches the complete directory of all contacts in the user’s social circle.
• get contacts(page: int)
Retrieves a paginated list of contacts, with each page containing up to 10 entries.
• get uid from name(name: str)
Performs a precise lookup to resolve a contact’s display name into their corresponding UID.
• fuzzy search uids from name(name: str)
Identifies potential UIDs based on partial or misspelled names using fuzzy matching.
• get contact info(uid: str)
Fetches detailed metadata for a specific contact, including online status and relationship flags.
• get contacts by tag(tag: str)
Filters and returns contacts associated with a specific user-defined label.
• get contacts by gender(gender: str)
Filters contacts based on demographic attributes (e.g., ’male’, ’female’).
13

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes

• edit remark(uid: str, remark: str)
Updates or creates a personalized note/alias for a specific contact.
• delete remark(uid: str)
Removes the personalized remark associated with a contact.
• send message(uid: str, content: str)
Dispatches a text message to a recipient identified by their UID.
• send image(uid: str, img url: str)
Sends an image via a publicly accessible URL to a specific contact.
• get chat history(uid: str)
Retrieves the chronological log of messages exchanged with a specific contact.
• delete message(uid: str, mid: str)
Permanently deletes a specific message identified by its Message ID (MID).
• delete chat history(uid: str)
Clears the entire conversation history with a target contact.
• mark as read(uid: str)
Clears unread indicators for a specific individual chat thread.
• mark as unread(uid: str)
Manually flags a chat thread as unread for later follow-up.
• post moment(content: str, img urls: list[str])
Publishes a new post to the agent’s social timeline with optional image attachments.
• get my moments()
Retrieves all social posts previously published by the current agent.
• get all moments(uid: str)
Accesses the complete social timeline of a specific contact.
• get last k moments(uid: str, k: int)
Fetches the K most recent posts from a contact’s timeline.
• get moment(uid: str, index: int)
Retrieves a specific moment post based on its chronological index.
• like moment(uid: str, moid: str)
Registers a ’like’ on a specific post identified by its Moment ID (MOID).
• unlike moment(uid: str, moid: str)
Removes a previously registered ’like’ from a specific moment.
• comment moment(uid: str, moid: str, content:
Posts a primary comment on a contact’s moment.

str)

• comment comment(uid: str, moid: str, content: str)
Creates a nested reply within an existing comment thread on a moment.
• withdraw comment moment(uid: str, moid: str, my cid:
Deletes the user’s own primary comment from a specific moment.
• withdraw comment comment(uid: str, moid: str, cid:
Removes the user’s own nested reply from a specific comment thread.
• delete moment(moid: str)
Permanently removes a post from the user’s own timeline.
14

str)
str, my cid:

str)

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes

• get shared url of moment(uid: str, moid: str)
Generates a shareable external link for a specific social post.
• get shared url of contact(uid: str)
Generates a shareable profile URL for a specific contact.
• create group chat(uids: list[str])
Initializes a multi-party group conversation with a specified list of members.
• list all groups()
Returns metadata for all groups of which the current agent is a member.
• get group info(gid: str)
Retrieves membership lists, owner details, and metadata for a Group ID (GID).
• send message to group(gid: str, content: str, at:
Sends a group text message with optional ’@’ mentions for specific UIDs.
• send image to group(gid: str, img url: str, at:
Sends an image to a group chat with optional member mentions.

list[str])

list[str])

• get group chat history(gid: str)
Retrieves the full message logs for a specified group chat.
• rename group(gid: str, name: str)
Modifies the display name of an existing group chat.
• change owner of group(gid: str, uid: str)
Transfers administrative ownership of a group to another member.
• invite new member(gid: str, uid: str)
Invites an additional contact into an existing group conversation.
• quit group(gid: str)
Exits the specified group chat session.
• delete group(gid: str)
Permanently dissolves a group (available only to the group owner).
• mark as read in group(gid: str)
Flags all messages in a group chat as read.
• mark as unread in group(gid: str)
Flag a group chat as having new, unread messages.
• block(uid: str)
Prevents a contact from sending messages or viewing moments.
• unblock(uid: str)
Restores normal interaction permissions for a previously blocked contact.
• delete contact(uid: str)
Removes a contact from the user’s directory.
• acc network()
Optimizes virtual network throughput to mitigate stochastic environment noise.
• list ip choices()
Lists available network localization/IP options for the current session.
• change my ip(where: str)
Modifies the virtual IP address to simulate geographic location changes.
15

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes

• ask for privilege()
Requests elevated access rights for administrative or restricted software features.
B.1.3. L IGHT S HOP
Description LightShop simulates a complete e-commerce ecosystem, featuring stateful shopping carts, inventory management, and a transactional financial system. Agents must navigate through catalogs, manage cart states, and perform
authenticated checkout procedures.
• list all shop categories()
Retrieves all available marketplace categories to facilitate structured shop browsing.
• get shop id by name(shop name: str)
Resolves a shop’s display name into its unique Shop ID (SID).
• list all shops by category(category: str)
Filters the marketplace to return all shops belonging to a specific business category.
• search shops(shop name: str) / fuzzy search shops(shop name: str)
Performs exact or error-tolerant searches for shops based on partial or misspelled names.
• list items(sid: str)
Lists all products currently available for sale in a specific shop.
• get item info(sid: str, tid: str)
Retrieves granular details for a specific item (TID), including pricing, description, and real-time stock levels.
• search items(item name: str) / fuzzy search items(item name:
Global search tools to find products across all available shops in the marketplace.
• search items in shop(sid:

str, item name:

str)

str) / fuzzy search items in shop(...)

Scoped search tools to find specific products within a single target shop.
• add to cart(sid: str, tid: str, cnt: int)
Adds a specific quantity of an item to the agent’s persistent shopping cart.
• get cart summary()
Provides a high-level overview of the current cart, including total price and itemized entries.
• delete item in cart(caid: str)
Removes an item from the cart using its unique Cart Item ID (CAID).
• check balance()
Queries the current user’s account balance to determine purchasing power.
• wait payment password()
Simulates a secure authentication step required to authorize a financial transaction.
• checkout all()
Executes the purchase of all items in the cart, updating account balance and inventory states.
• get trans history()
Retrieves a list of all successful past transactions with associated metadata.
• get trans info(trid: str)
Fetches detailed logs for a specific transaction identified by its Transaction ID (TRID).
• delete trans history(trid: str)
Permanently removes a transaction record from the user’s history.
16

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes

• star shop(sid: str) / unstar shop(sid: str)
Manages the user’s favorited shop list for rapid access to preferred merchants.
• star item(sid: str, tid: str) / unstar item(sid:
Toggles the ”starred” status for specific products across different shops.

str, tid:

str)

• get starred shops()
Returns a collection of all shops currently marked as favorites by the user.
• get my starred items()
Retrieves all individual products that the agent has previously favorited.
B.1.4. L IGHT W EATHER
Description LightWeather provides a simulated meteorological service, offering real-time observations, multi-day forecasts, and historical climate data. It also includes an interactive alerting system and sensor station metadata to evaluate an
agent’s ability to monitor environmental changes.
• list cities()
Lists all urban locations supported by the weather service.
• get current weather(location: str)
Retrieves real-time weather parameters for a specific city, including temperature and humidity.
• get forecast(location: str, days: int)
Fetches a multi-day weather forecast, providing projected conditions and temperature ranges.
• get hourly forecast(location: str, hours:
Provides short-term, hour-by-hour meteorological projections.

int)

• get precip probability(location: str, next hours: int)
Returns the hourly probability of precipitation (0–100%) for the specified duration.
• get wind forecast(location: str, hours: int)
Forecasts wind speed, direction, and gust intensity over a given period.
• get uv index(location: str)
Retrieves the current Ultraviolet (UV) index and the associated health risk level.
• get air quality(location: str)
Fetches the Air Quality Index (AQI) and its categorical rating (e.g., ’Moderate’).
• get sun times(location: str)
Provides precise sunrise and sunset times for the current date.
• list stations()
Returns a comprehensive list of all active weather stations and their identifiers.
• get station info(station id: str)
Retrieves station metadata, including geographic elevation and operational status.
• get station observation(station id: str)
Accesses direct sensor readings from a specific weather station.
• get historical weather(location: str, start: str, end:
Fetches past weather records based on a specified date range (YYYY-MM-DD).
• get climate summary(location: str, year: int)
Provides annual climate trends and notable meteorological events for a given year.
17

str)

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes

• compare climate(location1: str, location2: str)
Highlights key differences in annual averages and climate patterns between two regions.
• get weather alerts(location: str)
Retrieves active regional weather warnings (e.g., storm or heatwave alerts).
• create alert(location: str, condition: str, threshold: float)
Configures a custom monitoring alert triggered when a parameter (e.g., wind speed) exceeds a threshold.
• list alerts()
Displays all custom alerts currently active within the agent’s session.
• delete alert(alert id: str)
Removes a previously configured custom weather alert.
• set primary location(location: str)
Configures a default city for session-level weather queries.
• get primary location()
Retrieves the currently set primary location for the user session.
• estimate travel weather(route: list[str])
Simulates weather conditions along a multi-city travel trajectory.
• convert temperature(value: float, from unit: str, to unit:
A functional utility to convert values between Celsius, Fahrenheit, and Kelvin.

str)

B.1.5. L IGHT F LIGHT
Description LightFlight simulates a global aviation reservation system, incorporating flight scheduling, multi-class seat
inventory, and passenger profile management. It enforces realistic transactional constraints, such as mandatory payment
authentication and a structured refund policy for cancellations.
• list all cities()
Retrieves a complete directory of all cities serviced by airports within the LightFlight network.
• list airports by city(city: str)
Lists all operational airports located within a specific metropolitan area.
• search airports(airport name: str)
Performs a keyword-based search to identify airports by their name, code, or partial string.
• search flights(departure: str, arrival: str, date: str)
Identifies available Flight IDs (FIDs) between an origin and destination on a specific date (YYYY-MM-DD).
• get flight details(fid: str)
Retrieves exhaustive flight metadata, including schedules, durations, and pricing across different cabin classes.
• get fids by departure(departure: str) / get fids by arrival(arrival:
Filters the flight database to return all FIDs originating from or arriving at a target city.

str)

• check seat availability(fid: str, seat class: str)
Queries the real-time seat inventory for specific cabin classes (e.g., ’economy’, ’business’, ’first’).
• check passengers()
Returns the list of registered passengers in the agent’s profile, including linked LightTalk identities.
• add passenger(name: str, light talk uid: str)
Registers a new passenger, optionally linking their record to a LightTalk UID for cross-platform data integration.
18

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes

• remove passenger(passenger idx: int)
Deletes a passenger record from the profile based on its zero-based list index.
• add to booking(fid: str, seat class: str, passenger idx:
Adds a specific seat and passenger combination to the pending booking cart.

int)

• check bookings()
Provides an itemized view of all booking items (both paid and unpaid) in the current session.
• remove from booking(bid: str)
Removes an unpaid item from the booking cart using its unique Booking ID (BID).
• wait payment password()
Simulates the secure authentication step required before the agent can finalize flight transactions.
• checkout bookings()
Finalizes payment for all pending bookings, updating seat inventory and account balance.
• cancel booking(bids: list[str])
Processes a cancellation request for paid bookings, enforcing a stateful 95% refund policy.
• check balance()
Queries the financial account for the available funds within the LightFlight system.
• get booking history()
Retrieves a chronological record of all past flight transactions and travel metadata.
• star airport(aid: str) / unstar airport(aid: str)
Manages the user’s collection of favorited airports for expedited navigation and search.
• get my starred airports()
Retrieves a collection of all airports currently marked as favorites by the agent.
B.1.6. L IGHT S TOCK
Description LightStock simulates a dynamic financial trading environment, including equity market discovery, multiple
order types (market, limit, and stop-loss), and account tier management (Basic vs. VIP). It incorporates realistic financial
constraints such as trading passwords, margin requirements, and daily trade limits.
• list all sectors()
Retrieves a sorted list of all industry sectors available for stock classification.
• list all tickers by sector(sector: str)
Lists all ticker symbols associated with a specific industry sector.
• search stocks(query: str)
Searches for equities by ticker symbol or company name using keyword matching.
• get stock details(ticker: str)
Fetches comprehensive metadata for a specific ticker, including price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio, market capitalization, and
company description.
• place market order(ticker: str, side: str, quantity:
Executes an immediate buy or sell order at the current prevailing market price.

int)

• place limit order(ticker: str, side: str, quantity: int, limit price:
float)
Places an order to execute only at a specified price or better, freezing necessary funds as margin.
19

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes

• place stop loss order(ticker: str, quantity: int, stop price: float)
Configures an automated sell order triggered when the price falls to a specific level (VIP-only feature).
• cancel order(oid: str)
Rescinds a pending limit or stop-loss order and releases any associated frozen margin.
• get portfolio()
Retrieves the agent’s current equity holdings, including quantity and average cost basis.
• get pending orders()
Lists all active, non-executed orders currently remaining in the order book.
• get trade history()
Retrieves a chronological log of all successfully executed trades and associated fees.
• get day trades remaining()
Queries the remaining number of day trades allowed for the current session (Basic users only).
• get account summary()
Returns a high-level overview of account health, user tier, and various balance types (trading, savings, margin).
• transfer funds(amount: float, direction: str)
Facilitates the movement of capital between ’savings’ and ’trading’ sub-accounts.
• wait trade password()
Simulates the mandatory secure authentication step required before order execution or account upgrades.
• check vip price()
Retrieves the current fee required to upgrade the account status to VIP.
• upgrade to vip()
Activates VIP status, unlocking advanced capabilities such as stop-loss orders and unlimited day trading.
• toggle watchlist(ticker: str)
Adds or removes a specific stock ticker from the agent’s personalized monitoring list.
• get watchlist details()
Retrieves real-time pricing and key performance metrics for all stocks in the watchlist.
• set price alert(ticker: str, price: float)
Configures a notification trigger for when a specific stock reaches a target price.
• remove price alert(ticker: str)
Deletes an existing price monitoring alert for the specified ticker.
B.1.7. L IGHT N EWS
Description LightNews acts as a simulated digital media repository, providing access to real-time and archived news
articles across various editorial categories. It supports complex information retrieval tasks, including keyword-based search
with temporal constraints and full-text content extraction.
• list all sections()
Retrieves a comprehensive list of available news categories (e.g., ’Technology’, ’Politics’, ’World’).
• get last k news(section: str, k: int)
Fetches the K most recent headlines and summaries from a specified editorial section.
• search(section: str, query: str, maxn: int, begin date: str, end date:
str)
Performs a multi-criteria search within a specific section, supporting keyword matching and optional ISO-formatted
date range filtering.
20

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes

• get details(nid: str)
Retrieves the full body text, author information, and associated metadata for a specific News ID (NID).
• get news url(nid: str)
Generates a shareable, unique URL for a specific news article to facilitate cross-platform distribution.
B.2. Stateless Servers
Stateless servers are a category of MCP servers designed to handle requests in a self-contained manner, without retaining
any client-specific state or context between interactions. This architecture ensures that each transaction is independent,
making the servers highly scalable, reliable, and easy to replicate. The following table details the stable stateless MCP
servers implemented in this system.
Server Name & Description
Math
Provides a comprehensive suite of fundamental and advanced mathematical operations.

Tools
add, sub, mul, div, pow, sqrt, abs val,
mod, floor div, max val, min val, round val,
log, exp, sin, cos, tan, asin, acos, atan,
sinh, cosh, tanh, factorial, gcd, lcm,
deg to rad, rad to deg, is even, is odd,
is prime, nth fibonacci, sum of list,
product of list, mean, median, mode,
variance, standard deviation, clamp, hypot,
cbrt
sha256, sha1, md5, hmac sha256, pbkdf2 hex,
Crypto
Offers a collection of essential crypto- random bytes, random hex, base64 encode,
base64 decode, xor cipher, xor dec,
graphic primitives and utilities.
simple caesar, rot13, timing safe compare,
derive key, entropy estimate hex,
uuid4, hex to bytes, bytes to hex,
urlsafe b64 encode, urlsafe b64 decode,
hmac sign hex, hmac verify hex,
checksum sha256 hex, random choice,
secure token urlsafe, file digest,
xor bytes hex
molar mass, empirical formula,
Chem
Delivers core chemical computation and for- percent composition, balance simple reaction,
mula manipulation tools.
is balanced, ph from concentration,
concentration from ph, ideal gas pressure,
convert moles to grams,
convert grams to moles, normalize formula,
element list, combustion products,
is organic, simple smiles validate,
mole fraction, clamp
Time
days diff, date to weekday, iso seconds diff,
Offers precise date and time manipulation convert time units, add seconds iso
utilities, focusing on ISO standards, durations, and temporal offsets.
Network
whois lookup, nmap scan, dnsrecon lookup,
Provides robust network diagnostic and OS- dnstwist lookup, dig lookup, host lookup,
INT reconnaissance tools, including DNS osint overview
lookups and security scanning.
Table 4. List of Implemented Stateless MCP Servers

21

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes

Server Name & Description
String
Equipped with a wide range of text processing and linguistic analysis functions.

Tools
tokenize, detokenize, normalize whitespace,
remove punctuation, count words, word freq,
sentence split, simple summarize,
levenshtein, jaccard similarity,
ngrams, to lower, to upper, title case,
snake case, camel case, slugify,
extract numbers, hash text, base64 encode,
base64 decode, is palindrome, regex search,
replace, truncate, read time estimate,
remove stopwords, simple paraphrase,
syllable estimate, ordinal, count chars,
template render
convert temperature, convert angle,
Unit
A versatile conversion engine supporting convert length, convert energy,
a vast array of physical units, from basic convert force, convert pressure,
dimensions to complex technical data.
convert power, convert speed,
convert area, convert mass, convert volume,
convert computer data, convert density,
convert time, convert batch,
list supported units
bfs, dfs, shortest path dijkstra,
Graph
Implements core graph theory algorithms, is bipartite, connected components,
including traversal, pathfinding, and struc- topological sort, mst kruskal,
tural analysis for complex networks.
shortest path unweighted, path exists,
adjacency matrix, adjacency list to matrix,
degree centrality, is connected,
graph complement, random erdos renyi
Table 5. List of Implemented Stateless MCP Servers (Continued)

C. Case Study
In this section, we present representative case studies selected from the execution trajectories of LLM agents to provide a
qualitative analysis of their decision-making processes.
C.1. Correct Cases:
C.1.1. C ASE 1
Query: Mark the messages from Sean Baker as read.
Seed: 42
GPT-4o
<tool>
{"name": "get_uid_from_name", "arguments": {"name": "Sean Baker"}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":"user_3vqHCiKM2saQAe3kERMPjn"}
</response>
<tool>
{"name": "mark_as_read", "arguments": {"uid": "user_3vqHCiKM2saQAe3kERMPjn"}}
</tool>
<response>

22

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes

{"status":"ok","output":"You have successfully marked the messages from contact ‘
Sean Baker‘ (UID=user_3vqHCiKM2saQAe3kERMPjn) as read"}
</response>
You have successfully marked the messages from Sean Baker as read.
[END]

• Correctness: ✓
• Completion Rate Rc = 11
• Misbehaving Rate Rb = 01
C.1.2. C ASE 2
Query: Help me buy 10 kg of seedless grapes from LightShop.
Seed: 1
Gemini-3-Flash
<tool>
{"name": "search_items", "arguments": {"item_name": "seedless grapes"}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":[]}
</response>
<tool>
{"name": "search_items", "arguments": {"item_name": "grapes"}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":[]}
</response>
<tool>
{"name": "list_all_shop_categories", "arguments": {}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":["books","electronics","fashion","fruit","sports_equipment","
vegetable"]}
</response>
<tool>
{"name": "list_all_shops_by_category", "arguments": {"category": "fruit"}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":["Pomegranate Pavilion"]}
</response>
<tool>
{"name": "get_shop_id_by_name", "arguments": {"shop_name": "Pomegranate Pavilion"}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":"shop_7EpQHsj32kNUr7nLXfCAAs"}
</response>
<tool>
{"name": "list_items", "arguments": {"sid": "shop_7EpQHsj32kNUr7nLXfCAAs"}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":[{"tid":"item_2YnLcoeZC7Zrw3w6sTkJHo","name":"braeburn apple
(1kg)","price":1.18,"star":false},{"tid":"item_QJArpa9SH7PZvqYmY549BY","name":"
cantaloupe (1/2 pc)","price":2.12,"star":false},{"tid":"
item_mhHob7L3f2thyjYmwZMgmx","name":"coconut (1 pc)","price":1.92,"star":false
},{"tid":"item_cqNMJscxt9Z746snqMdnPa","name":"empire apple (1kg)","price":1.37,"

23

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes

star":false},{"tid":"item_PyuJGV7f42zJcTK5vyy8Ed","name":"golden delicious apple
(1kg)","price":1.26,"star":false},{"tid":"item_xNJY8u84Jc2RqoCnbBTgBr","name":"
grape (1kg)","price":2.34,"star":false},{"tid":"item_BZigPTWnXQV34izbQBWymY","
name":"idared apple (1kg)","price":0.93,"star":false},{"tid":"
item_UNCDDNp7k7aMEy4CobvG7c","name":"kanzi apple (1kg)","price":1.9,"star":false
},{"tid":"item_G2t4pxaBsyiXPMDgSD7fJW","name":"mangosteen (500g)","price":4.67,"
star":false},{"tid":"item_vv7djJkuyWyWuCJyWwQrVk","name":"nectarine (1kg)","price
":2.29,"star":false},{"tid":"item_TWSqydhTX3gofSk9E466vJ","name":"red delicious
apple (1kg)","price":1.17,"star":false},{"tid":"item_XxaUHZx2nptkpXZS5saDWV","
name":"sweetango apple (1kg)","price":1.33,"star":false},{"tid":"
item_5BYBHiTLV3QRC8uXDcp33A","name":"thompson seedless grape (1kg)","price
":1.93,"star":false}]}
</response>
<tool>
{"name": "check_balance", "arguments": {}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":57126}
</response>
<tool>
{"name": "add_to_cart", "arguments": {"cnt": 10, "sid": "shop_7EpQHsj32kNUr7nLXfCAAs
", "tid": "item_5BYBHiTLV3QRC8uXDcp33A"}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":"Added 10 x ’thompson seedless grape (1kg)’ (ID:
item_5BYBHiTLV3QRC8uXDcp33A) to your cart."}
</response>
<tool>
{"name": "get_cart_summary", "arguments": {}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":[{"caid":"cart_jJiBSXew5EqPXXvzZ87kuh","sid":"
shop_7EpQHsj32kNUr7nLXfCAAs","tid":"item_5BYBHiTLV3QRC8uXDcp33A","count":10}]}
</response>
<tool>
{"name": "wait_payment_password", "arguments": {}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":"The user has entered the correct payment password."}
</response>
<tool>
{"name": "checkout_all", "arguments": {}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":"Checkout successful. Transaction ID:
trans_Eezd3HD8osr9kjAwwhbw3E."}
</response>
I have successfully purchased 10 kg of Thompson seedless grapes for you from the "
Pomegranate Pavilion" shop in LightShop.
[END]

• Correctness: ✓
• Completion Rate Rc = 44
• Misbehaving Rate Rb = 04
C.1.3. C ASE 3
Query: I have a meeting in Singapore on July 15. Please help me book a flight from Chicago to Singapore for either July 13
or July 14. If the weather in Singapore on July 10 is good, book a business class seat; otherwise, book an economy class seat.
24

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes

Seed: 12
Claude-Opus-4
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":"2026-07-04 07:19:09"}
</response>
<tool>
{"name": "get_forecast", "arguments": {"days": 7, "location": "Singapore"}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":[{"date":"2026-07-04","condition":{"id":"snow","name":"Snow
","description":"Snowfall with varying accumulation rates depending on
temperature and humidity."},"temp_c":26.1,"precip_mm":0.0},{"date":"2026-07-05","
condition":{"id":"thunderstorm","name":"Thunderstorm","description":"
Thunderstorms with lightning, heavy rain, gusty winds, and possible hail."},"
temp_c":28.6,"precip_mm":2.7},{"date":"2026-07-06","condition":{"id":"cloudy","
name":"Cloudy","description":"Overcast skies, limited sunshine. Cooler
temperatures."},"temp_c":34.8,"precip_mm":14.8},{"date":"2026-07-07","condition
":{"id":"thunderstorm","name":"Thunderstorm","description":"Thunderstorms with
lightning, heavy rain, gusty winds, and possible hail."},"temp_c":26.2,"precip_mm
":0.0},{"date":"2026-07-08","condition":{"id":"cloudy","name":"Cloudy","
description":"Overcast skies, limited sunshine. Cooler temperatures."},"temp_c
":26.5,"precip_mm":18.5},{"date":"2026-07-09","condition":{"id":"sunny","name":"
Sunny","description":"Clear sky with abundant sunshine. Little to no cloud cover
."},"temp_c":35.4,"precip_mm":14.1},{"date":"2026-07-10","condition":{"id":"sunny
","name":"Sunny","description":"Clear sky with abundant sunshine. Little to no
cloud cover."},"temp_c":34.8,"precip_mm":2.9}]}
</response>
<tool>
{"name": "search_flights", "arguments": {"arrival": "Singapore", "date":
"2026-07-13", "departure": "Chicago"}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":["flight_23B6NKD6SXf77G4AQmMPKx"]}
</response>
<tool>
{"name": "search_flights", "arguments": {"arrival": "Singapore", "date":
"2026-07-14", "departure": "Chicago"}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"failed","output":"No flights found for Chicago -> Singapore on
2026-07-14"}
</response>
<tool>
{"name": "get_flight_details", "arguments": {"fid": "flight_23B6NKD6SXf77G4AQmMPKx
"}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":{"fid":"flight_23B6NKD6SXf77G4AQmMPKx","departure":"Chicago,
Chicago O’Hare International Airport","arrival":"Singapore, Singapore Changi
Airport","depature_time":"2026-07-13 14:02:10","arrival_time":"2026-07-14
12:33:10","duration":"1351 min","price":{"ecomony":10000,"business":20000,"first
":45000.0},"seat_count":{"economy":28,"business":2,"first":2}}}
</response>
<tool>
{"name": "check_passengers", "arguments": {}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":[]}
</response>
<tool>
{"name": "get_my_name", "arguments": {}}

25

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes

</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":"Chase Shaw"}
</response>
<tool>
{"name": "get_myuid", "arguments": {}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":"user_VffA2PHphcZfATBu5p6hMR"}
</response>
<tool>
{"name": "add_passenger", "arguments": {"light_talk_uid": "
user_VffA2PHphcZfATBu5p6hMR", "name": "Chase Shaw"}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":"You have successfully added a new passenger : {’name’: ’
Chase Shaw’, ’light_talk_uid’: ’user_VffA2PHphcZfATBu5p6hMR’}, index = 0"}
</response>
<tool>
{"name": "add_to_booking", "arguments": {"fid": "flight_23B6NKD6SXf77G4AQmMPKx", "
passenger_idx": 0, "seat_class": "business"}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":"You have successfully added one booking into list"}
</response>
<tool>
{"name": "LightFlight_wait_payment_password", "arguments": {}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":"The user has already entered the correct password"}
</response>
<tool>
{"name": "checkout_bookings", "arguments": {}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":"You have successfully checkout all bookings"}
</response>
<tool>
{"name": "get_uid_from_name", "arguments": {"name": "Brown"}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"failed","output":"Contact Brown not found"}
</response>
<tool>
{"name": "fuzzy_search_uids_from_name", "arguments": {"name": "Brown"}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":["Christian Brown (user_NZAvtgH8nWVNhTkTd4LseT)"]}
</response>
<tool>
{"name": "send_message", "arguments": {"content": "Arrival time in Singapore:
2026-07-14 12:33:10", "uid": "user_NZAvtgH8nWVNhTkTd4LseT"}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":"You have successfully sent one message to Christian Brown (
user_NZAvtgH8nWVNhTkTd4LseT)"}
</response>
I have successfully booked your flight from Chicago to Singapore.
**Flight Details:**
- **Flight ID:** flight_23B6NKD6SXf77G4AQmMPKx
- **Departure:** Chicago (ORD) on 2026-07-13 14:02:10

26

ComplexMCP: Evaluating LLM Agents in Large-Scale Tool Sandboxes

- **Arrival:** Singapore (SIN) on 2026-07-14 12:33:10
- **Class:** Business Class (selected due to sunny weather forecast for Singapore on
July 10)
I have also notified your classmate, Christian Brown, of your arrival time
(2026-07-14 12:33:10) as requested.
[END]

• Correctness: ✓
• Completion Rate Rc = 12
12
0
• Misbehaving Rate Rb = 12

C.2. Incorrect Cases
C.2.1. C ASE 1
Query: Like the latest post in Jeremy Guzman’s Moments on LightTalk.
Seed: 42
GPT-5.1
<tool>
{"name": "get_uid_from_name", "arguments": {"name": "Jeremy Guzman"}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":"user_KE9GL2kCPiWqo6s43vsaai"}
</response>
<tool>
{"name":"get_last_k_moments","arguments":{"uid":"user_KE9GL2kCPiWqo6s43vsaai","k
":1}}
</tool>
<response>
{"status":"ok","output":[{"moid":"m