Agents All the Way Down
A Methodology for Building Custom AI Agents from Substrate to Production
Marc Alier Forment¹, Juanan Pereira², Francisco José García-Peñalvo³, María José Casañ
Guerrero¹
¹ Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC), Barcelona, Spain ² Universidad del País
Vasco / Euskal Herriko Unibertsitatea (UPV/EHU), Donostia-San Sebastián, Spain ³ Universidad de Salamanca (USAL), Salamanca, Spain
marc.alier@upc.edu

Abstract
Thousands of software engineers are building or about to build custom AI agents —
agents that live inside their own application, talk to their own data and tools, enforce
their own security boundaries, and carry their own brand and audit trail. What separates
custom agents from the general-purpose tier (Claude Code, Cursor, and the like) is fit, not
capability: each is built for one job, by the engineer who will maintain it. No published
practice, though, sets out how to build one end to end. The pieces are everywhere:
function-calling APIs, the Model Context Protocol, general-purpose code agents to pair
with. The practice that chains them together is not — it lives in podcasts, blog posts, and
leaked system prompts. This paper writes that practice down as a methodology, Agents
All the Way Down, with a defining shape: two preconditions the engineer crosses once and
keeps, then three practices the engineer repeats for the life of the agent. The preconditions
are (P1) Substrate — treating the large language model (LLM) as a software component,
framed as tools → system → messages under today’s prompt-caching schemes — and
(P2) Building blocks — function calling, the Model Context Protocol (MCP), commandline interface (CLI) orchestration, the liteshell pattern, the agent loop, skills, characters,
hooks, and scaffolding. The three repeated practices are (P3) prototype with a generalpurpose agent; (P4) harvest, fold, and ship the result as a CLI — the Turtle pattern; and
(P5) agent-tests-agent, in which a general-purpose agent drives the custom agent through
behavioural scenarios. P5 complements classical software testing; it does not replace it.
Once the preconditions are in hand, the engineer’s working life is the loop P3 → P4 →
P5 → P3 — and that loop is where the title lives. One corollary falls out for free: multiagent orchestration is just CLI composition. We build the methodology framework-free,
for engineering reasons rather than pedagogical ones (§7.1). It was distilled from the AAC
(Agent-Assisted Creator), a custom agent for the open-source LAMB (Learning Assistants
Manager and Builder) educational platform: built in about ten days by one developer with
an AI pair-programmer, in production at two universities (~200 educator-creators) since

1

April 2026, and since carried to other LAMB subprojects. We present it as a transferable
practice, independent of any language or framework.
Keywords: Large language models · AI agents · Agent engineering · Software engineering
methodology · LLM tooling · Agent-tests-agent · Multi-agent orchestration · Supply-chain
security

1. Introduction
1.1 What is a custom AI agent?
A custom AI agent is a piece of software that decides, on each turn, which tool to call
next, with the help of a large language model. It is not a chatbot or a generic copilot: it is
purpose-built — for one application, one domain, one set of users — by the engineer who
will maintain it.
The general-purpose code-agent tier — Claude Code [Anthropic 2026a], OpenCode
[Anomaly 2026], Cursor [Cursor 2026], Aider [Gauthier 2026] — has become extraordinary
engineering. Those are the carpenter’s bench saw: powerful, broadly useful, deliberately
general. The custom agent is the cabinet maker’s jig: built for one specific job, by/for the
cabinet maker, fitted to one piece of work. The distinction this paper concerns itself with
is fit, not capability.
What makes an agent custom? Six axes:
1. Domain knowledge embedded in the system prompt and skills — the agent knows
the engineer’s codebase, conventions, vocabulary, and data shape as durable cached
system content, not as conversational re-priming each session.
2. Tools the general agent does not have — internal APIs, private CLIs, line-of-business
data sources. The agent operates on the engineer’s application’s surface rather than the
host filesystem and shell.
3. Deployment inside the engineer’s own application — the agent runs inside the
FastAPI route, the Spring Boot service, the educational platform, the e-commerce
backend. The user never sees a terminal; they see the product, with an agent in it.
4. Security boundaries the engineer controls — an allow-list fitted to the job; the agent
cannot do what it does not need to do.
5. Cost predictability through right-sized model choice — small specialised model for
the classifier, frontier model for the planner, local model for high-volume mechanical
work. The cost curve is the engineer’s to shape.
6. Brand, voice, audit trail, and compliance posture — the agent talks to the engineer’s
users in the engineer’s voice; it logs to the engineer’s audit pipeline; it complies with the
engineer’s regulatory boundaries.
An agent that needs at least one of those is a candidate for the custom build. An agent that
needs none of them should not be built — the general-purpose tier handles it.

2

1.2 Why build one?
The engineer builds a custom agent when one or more of the six axes prevents the generalpurpose agent from doing the job cleanly. Four concrete shapes of problem recur:
• An assistant inside an educational platform — the AAC (Agent-Assisted Creator)
studied as a worked example in §6. Educators are not engineers; the agent must speak
the language of pedagogy, not of code; it must operate the platform’s surface, not the
host’s shell; it must run inside the platform’s backend, not in a terminal.
• A continuous-integration / continuous-deployment (CI/CD) helper that knows the
team’s deployment topology, runbook conventions, and incident history. The general
agent knows generic CI; the custom agent knows the team’s.
• A customer-service agent that operates on the customer’s own state. The general agent
cannot resolve the customer record; the custom agent’s first tool does.
• A data-extraction pipeline agent that handles documents of a shape the business sees
a thousand times a day. The general agent can do one document well; the custom agent
does the thousand reliably, at the right cost, inside the engineer’s product.
The general-purpose agent can do any of these once; the custom agent does them reliably,
at predictable cost, inside the engineer’s application. A custom agent is what the engineer
builds when the general agent ends and the problem keeps going.
1.3 How does the engineer build one?
The question, then, is: what is the practice for building such a thing? In 2026 the toolbox
is extraordinary — function-calling APIs across every major LLM provider, the Model
Context Protocol [Anthropic 2024b; MCP 2025] for tool exposure, mature general-purpose
code agents usable as pair-programmers, dozens of agent frameworks. But the practice of
building a custom agent has remained largely tacit. It lives in podcast interviews with
framework creators, in leaked codebases — such as the Claude Code system-prompt leak
of April 2026 — in GitHub READMEs that show what to do but not why, and in conference
talks that present finished products without the path that produced them. The ingredients
have been catalogued; the recipe has not.
This paper proposes one we have tested. The methodology has five phases, with an organising asymmetry that shapes the rest of the paper: the first two phases are preconditions
the engineer crosses once and keeps; the last three are the practice the engineer iterates
indefinitely (see §3 for the full presentation and §4 for why the practice is structurally a
cycle).
• P1 — Substrate. Internalise the LLM as a software component: the structural framing
(tools → system → messages) under current provider prompt-caching schemes, the four
practical constraints (cost, hallucination, context, time), and the cache discipline that
follows from them.
• P2 — Building blocks. Vocabulary fluency: function calling, MCP versus CLI versus
the liteshell pattern, the agent loop, skills, characters, scaffolding.

3

• P3 — Prototype with a general-purpose agent. Use Claude Code, OpenCode, or
Cursor as pair-programmer and reconnaissance tool to build the first working prototype
against the real platform.
• P4 — Harvest, fold, ship as CLI. Collect tools, security scaffolding, skills, characters,
and instruction sets discovered in P3; fold them into a small agent loop; ship the result
as a command-line interface — the Turtle pattern.
• P5 — Agent-tests-agent. Use a general-purpose CLI agent to drive the custom agent
through scenarios; treat behavioural evaluation as a complement to (not a replacement
for) classical software-engineering testing.
The title — Agents All the Way Down — names the recursive structure of P3–P4–P5: the
agent the engineer builds is itself a tool that another agent can drive. The general-purpose
agent that drove the prototype (P3) is the same agent that tests the shipped artifact (P5). The
orchestrator that composes specialists (§5) is itself an agent. The image is borrowed from
the cosmological-regress anecdote popularised in modern English by Hawking [Hawking
1988], who attributes it to a lecture by Bertrand Russell. The methodology takes the image
seriously and structural-recursively, not paradoxically.
1.4 Contributions
This paper makes four contributions:
1. A named end-to-end methodology in five phases: substrate, building blocks, prototype, ship-as-CLI, agent-tests-agent. To our knowledge no current publication chains
all five into a single practice (see §2). Each phase has explicit acceptance criteria and an
anti-mandate list.
2. A novel quality-assurance discipline (P5): agent-tests-agent. Classical software-engineering testing provides typing, unit tests, integration tests, and end-to-end tests; all
four address deterministic behaviour and are necessary but not sufficient for agents,
whose surface includes stochastic, scenario-shaped behaviour. We frame agent-testsagent as a complementary behavioural-evaluation layer: a general-purpose agent
drives the custom agent through scenarios, observes outputs and tool traces, and
returns a structured evaluation. Classical testing and agent-tests-agent address different
failure modes and are best deployed together.
3. A multi-agent orchestration model derivable from the methodology itself: once the
agent is shipped as a CLI (P4), inter-agent composition is just CLI composition. We
name this the Turtle corollary and observe that established orchestration patterns —
supervisor/worker, parallel fan-out, conditional handoff, Ralph loops [Huntley 2026]
— emerge naturally without framework primitives.
4. An argument — not a demonstrated result — for dependency-aware agent design as
a security posture. The supply-chain incident record of 2024–2026 (CVE-2024-3094 in
xz, the 2026 PyPI LiteLLM/Telnyx incident, sustained PyPI malware volume) makes
dependency risk a routine engineering concern, and a custom agent built by this
4

methodology has, by construction, a small dependency surface — all else equal, structurally less exposed than a framework-stack equivalent. We present this as a posture,
deliberately of lesser evidentiary weight than contributions (1)–(3): its empirical validation — measured dependency count and attack-surface comparison across matched
stacks — is left to future work (§7.2).
1.5 Scope and audience
This is a methodology paper: its subject is the practice of building custom agents, end to
end. The frameworks surveyed in §2 are there to locate that contribution, not to rank them,
and the AAC and LAMB appear as a worked example whose lessons hold outside the
EdTech domain they came from (§7.5).
It assumes a competent practitioner who has used at least one LLM provider API, function
calling, and one general-purpose code agent such as Claude Code. You need no framework
experience and no Python — the examples are in Python only because it is convenient.
1.6 Paper map
§2 surveys the published agent-construction literature and locates this paper’s contribution. §3 presents the five phases in sequence, with the preconditions / practice asymmetry
made explicit at the opener; the framework-free design choice is also explained there. §4
promotes the P3 → P4 → P5 cycle from addendum to centre — after preconditions are
in hand, the methodology is the cycle. §5 develops the Turtle corollary — orchestration as
CLI composition — and illustrates the multi-agent pattern. §6 grounds the methodology
in the AAC build as internal deployment evidence, with the AAC in production at two
universities since April 2026. §7 discusses when frameworks remain the right choice, the
supply-chain security argument for dependency-aware design, the build / deploy memory asymmetry that separates Turtles from Splinters, and open empirical questions. §8
concludes. Appendix A lists acronyms and methodology-specific vocabulary; the reader
unfamiliar with any of the agent-engineering or software-engineering terminology may
keep it open alongside the body.

2. Background: AI agent construction, 2022–2026
The published history of LLM-driven agents is short. We sketch it in four beats to locate
this paper’s contribution.
2.1 The chatbot era (2022 – mid-2023)
The release of ChatGPT in November 2022 [OpenAI 2022] helped make the conversational
LLM interface a mass-market product surface. The early “agents” of this period were
prompt-chaining demos — multi-step pipelines orchestrated by hand-written Python,
with the LLM as a text-in / text-out component. The ReAct paper [Yao et al. 2022]
articulated reasoning-and-acting as a pattern but appeared before mainstream structured

5

tool-calling APIs were widely available, so it framed the loop conceptually before later API
standardisation made such loops substantially easier to implement in production settings.
2.2 The function-calling era (mid-2023 – 2024)
OpenAI’s introduction of function calling in June 2023 [OpenAI 2023] turned tool invocation into a first-class API interaction pattern. The LLM could now request a tool by emitting
a structured object; the host program executed; the result returned as a tool message.
Anthropic, Google, and the open-weight providers followed within months. Function
calling became the fundamental agent cycle: prompt → tool call → execution → result →
next prompt.
LangChain [LangChain 2026] was one of the most visible early orchestration libraries
during the first wave of tool-calling applications. Its strength was breadth — every LLM
provider, every vector database, every external tool wrapped behind a unified API. Its
retrospective weakness, as reported by practitioners across blogs and conference talks
during 2024–2025, was the cost of those abstractions: failure modes were difficult to
diagnose through the framework’s layers.
2.3 Framework proliferation (2024 – 2025)
The 2024–2025 period saw the rise of multiple orchestration styles, including graph-based
(LangGraph [LangChain 2026b]), crew-based (CrewAI [CrewAI Inc. 2026]), multi-agent
conversation (AutoGen [Wu et al. 2023]), declarative compilation (DSPy [Khattab et
al. 2023]), and others. Each encoded a distinct opinion about what multi-agent orchestration should look like.
Concurrently, the academic community produced methodological precursors that anticipate individual pieces of the practice this paper names. Reflexion [Shinn et al. 2023]
articulates agent self-reflection — the closest published prior art to P5 (agent-tests-agent).
Self-Refine [Madaan et al. 2023] explores iterative-refinement patterns. Toolformer [Schick
et al. 2023] grounds tool use. Voyager [Wang et al. 2023] grounds skill accumulation. The
2023–2025 survey literature [Wang et al. 2023b; Xi et al. 2023] documents the explosion of
agent systems but does not propose a unified construction methodology. The same span
also saw a popular autonomous-agent wave — AutoGPT and BabyAGI [Nakajima 2023]
— which, though not peer-reviewed, was widely influential in popularising the idea of
an LLM decomposing and pursuing its own task loop; it belongs in an honest chronology
even though neither offered a reusable construction practice. What this paper contributes
is a single sequential framing that links such ingredients into a five-phase engineering
workflow.
2.4 The code-agent era (2024 – present)
The release of Claude Code [Anthropic 2026a], followed by OpenCode [Anomaly 2026],
the maturation of Cursor [Cursor 2026] and Aider [Gauthier 2026], and the spread of
repository-aware coding agents through GitHub Copilot and similar products, established

6

a new tier of artifact: the general-purpose code agent. These products increasingly expose
repository-aware editing, terminal access, and iterative tool use in production settings.
The code-agent tier did three things to the agent-construction landscape:
• It demonstrated that custom agent loops were tractable. Anthropic’s “Building Effective AI Agents” (December 2024) [Anthropic 2024] documents a small-loop pattern
in which most additional complexity lives in dispatch, persistence, and security scaffolding rather than in framework abstractions; in the same period HuggingFace’s
SmolAgents [HuggingFace 2024] pushed the complementary tools-as-code (code-asaction) approach, collapsing the tool surface to a single execution path.
• It gave practitioners a tool for prototyping their own agents. A code agent driving the
engineer through a custom agent build is the dynamic this paper’s P3 phase names.
• It exposed the methodological gap. Practitioners with access to Claude Code or
OpenCode could build custom agents productively, but the practice of building them
remained scattered across vendor docs, blog posts, podcast appearances, and leaked
system prompts.
2.5 The methodological gap
Across the four eras, the agent-construction literature has converged on a recognisable
vocabulary (function calling, MCP, the agent loop, skills, evaluation) and a set of orthogonal contributions: ReAct for the reasoning loop, Reflexion for self-evaluation, Toolformer
for tool use, Voyager for skill accumulation, AutoGen for multi-agent conversation, LangGraph for graph orchestration. What is missing is a named, sequential practice that chains
these contributions into a single transferable methodology — across one phase taxonomy,
with explicit acceptance criteria, framework-independent. The closest existing documents
— Anthropic’s engineering blog, the MCP specification, the various framework READMEs
— cover one or two phases each; none cover all five.
The gap is not that the pieces are missing — it is that no published work chains them.
The contributions each cover a fragment of the path and stop: Anthropic’s engineering
writing gives substrate intuitions and an effective-agents framing [Anthropic 2024]; function-calling and MCP documentation give the tool-use mechanics [Anthropic 2024b; MCP
2025]; the research line on self-evaluation, tool use, and skill accumulation each formalises
a single mechanism (Reflexion [Shinn et al. 2023], Toolformer [Schick et al. 2023], Voyager
[Wang et al. 2023]); the orchestration frameworks (LangGraph, AutoGen, CrewAI) give
multi-agent coordination; and the surveys catalogue the field without prescribing a build
[Wang et al. 2023b; Sapkota et al. 2025], the latter distinguishing “AI Agents” from “Agentic AI” as concepts without proposing a construction methodology. Each covers one or two
phases; none presents substrate → building blocks → prototype → ship → test as a
single named, framework-independent practice with explicit acceptance criteria. That
an emerging agentic software engineering discipline is now framing modeling, development,
testing, deployment, and orchestration as one combined area [IEEE Software 2026] signals

7

the same gap from the other side. The contribution of this paper is to fill it, frameworkfree by construction.

3. The methodology — five phases

Figure 1: Figure 1. The methodology in one diagram — five phases, two-plus-three: P1
(substrate) and P2 (building blocks) are preconditions the engineer crosses once and keeps;
P3 (prototype), P4 (ship as CLI), and P5 (agent-tests-agent) are the practice the engineer
iterates indefinitely. The dashed arrow from P5 to P3 is the iteration spine (§4) — the
practice loop the engineer lives in after preconditions are in hand.
Preconditions and practice — the structural asymmetry of the methodology. The five
phases are presented in strict sequence, but they are not five iterations of the same kind
of work. P1 (substrate) and P2 (building blocks) are preconditions — what the engineer
must internalise before the methodology can be applied. Their acceptance criteria are
knowledge: the engineer can read a usage record and diagnose its cost shape (P1); the engineer can name each building block and pick the right one (P2). P1 and P2 are crossed once
and kept; they are not iterated. P3 (prototype), P4 (ship as CLI), and P5 (agent-tests-agent)
are the practice itself. Their acceptance criteria are artifacts: a working prototype, a CLI
invocation, a scenario suite. The engineer iterates P3 → P4 → P5 → P3 indefinitely once
preconditions are in hand. The methodology’s recursion — agents all the way down —
lives in the P3-P5 loop. P1 and P2 are the floor on which the loop stands. The presentation
order below preserves the strict sequence, but the reader should hold the asymmetry: P1
and P2 are read once; P3–P5 are read with the recognition that this is where the engineer’s
working life happens.
On frameworks. The methodology is framework-free by construction. §7.1 sets out the
engineering reasons — churn-prone abstractions, a larger dependency surface (§7.2) —
and the cases where a framework is still the right call.
Phase structure. Each phase below has (i) a substantive claim, (ii) explicit acceptance
criteria, and (iii) anti-mandates — things the practitioner should not do. The sequence
matters because each phase’s correctness depends on choices made under the previous
phase’s framing.

8

3.1 P1 — Substrate
Claim. The engineer building a custom agent must internalise the LLM as a software
component. This is more than use the LLM API correctly. It means keeping five things in
view at once:
• how next-token prediction actually works;
• how the tokeniser shapes both cost and behaviour;
• the fixed-size context window as a resource every part of the prompt competes for;
• the alignment stack’s role in setting the model’s defaults;
• the four practical constraints — cost, hallucination, context, time.
Without this internalisation, every later decision is taken in the dark.
A structural framing. A substantive addition to the standard LLM-as-component framing:
for Anthropic-style prompt caching [Anthropic 2026b], the cacheable prefix is ordered as
tools, then system, then messages:
[ tools ]
← declared at agent init; most stable; cached longest
[ system ]
← set at session start; stable per session; cached
[ messages ] ← grow per turn; only the latest are fresh tokens

9

Figure 2: Figure 2. The cached prefix — tools → system → messages as a single layered
structure handed to the LLM on every call. Volatility increases top-to-bottom; any change
above invalidates the cache for everything below.
Stable content placed earlier in that prefix is cheaper to reuse across turns. The discipline
is to segregate volatility so the stable parts remain cached; volatility is not the same as
importance (messages are the most volatile and also where the work happens; the lesson
is about structure, not priority). Any change to tools or system invalidates the cache for
everything downstream — reordering tools alphabetically as a “cleanup” can erase a
session’s accumulated cache.
Cache pricing in practice. Current official pricing pages show that cache-read or explicit
context-caching discounts are often close to one tenth of base input cost on Anthropic
[Anthropic 2026b], on OpenAI flagship text models [OpenAI 2026], and on Google Gemini

10

entries where explicit caching is available [Google 2026a; Google 2026b]. DeepSeek’s
published cache-hit pricing [DeepSeek 2026a; DeepSeek 2026b] is substantially lower
— model-specific cache-hit multipliers approach 0.02× and below at current rates.
Google’s explicit caching additionally bills storage. Cache discounts are provider- and
model-specific, often substantial, and should be cited directly from current provider
documentation when reported. The engineering implication is invariant across providers:
engineering for cache hits makes the agent cheap and fast by design, not by luck.
Key-Value (KV) cache discipline. Tools are declared once at init and immutable during
the session. System is set once at session start and holds five categories of content: oneshot tool-use examples, worldview / domain knowledge, persona, directives, memories.
Messages grow strictly append-only — never rewritten in place, never spliced, never
popped. Per-turn dynamic context (timestamps, the user’s current question, tool results)
belongs in messages, not in system: placing stable instructions in the cached prefix and
keeping volatile per-turn state in message history rather than the system block is the
recommended posture [Anthropic 2026b].
Acceptance. The engineer can read an LLM call’s usage record and diagnose its cost shape
on first read. Given a working agent, can identify where its cache prefix begins and ends
and why each section is positioned where it is.
Anti-mandate. Do not put dynamic context (current timestamps, runtime state, the user’s
current message) into the system prompt for cache hygiene. Do not reorder tools or system
between sessions if no functional change is needed.
3.2 P2 — Building blocks
P2 is the vocabulary the methodology operates in. Each block is a tool in the toolkit, not
a topic in its own right. The goal is to make each block legible enough that P3 and P4 can
pick the right one off the shelf deliberately.
Function calling. The fundamental agent cycle: pass the model a list of tool schemas
({name, description, parameters}); when the model decides a tool is needed, it returns
a structured tool-call object; the host code intercepts, executes, and returns the result as
a tool-result message. Three operational concerns. First, the tool-count problem: large tool
catalogs can degrade focus and increase prompt overhead [Anthropic 2024]; numeric
thresholds for “too many” should be quantified empirically per use case rather than
relied on as folklore. Second, schema design: atomic operations, documentation-quality
descriptions, JSON-Schema-clean parameters, graceful failure modes. Third, where security
lives: never in the schema, never in the description, never in the system prompt, but in
the scaffolding’s tool dispatcher — prompt instructions help steer behaviour, but authorisation and execution policy belong in deterministic host-side controls.
MCP, CLIs, and the liteshell pattern. The Model Context Protocol [Anthropic 2024b; MCP
2025] is a useful open standard for connecting LLM applications to tools and external
context. In local engineering workflows, however, CLI surfaces often remain attractive
11

because models are heavily exposed to shell documentation and usage patterns during
pretraining, and because credential-handling differs by transport. The current MCP authorisation specification [MCP 2026] covers HTTP-based transports; STDIO transports are
expected to read credentials from the environment. That is a narrow, transport-specific fact
about local credential handling. We do not read it as evidence that OAuth-over-MCP is
immature across the board.
A cost model, not a single ratio. The token cost of either surface decomposes cleanly, and
the comparison is better stated as a calculation than as a headline number. An MCP call
pays, per session, for the tool registry — every exposed tool’s name, description, and JSON
schema, fixed at the head of the conversation — and then, per call, for structured arguments
and a structured result the model must take into context whole. A CLI call pays for the
command text and the command’s stdout/stderr, with no per-session registry:
MCP cost ≈ tool registry + schema + arguments + structured result + reasoning per
call
CLI cost ≈ command + terminal output + reasoning per command

The governing quantity is therefore not “MCP versus CLI” in the abstract but
overhead ≈ (number of exposed tools) × (size of each tool’s description and schema)
× (verbosity of returned data).
The MCP specification makes the registry explicit — tools are named operations with
descriptions, typed inputs, and metadata exposed to the model [MCP 2025] — and
Anthropic’s own engineering guidance notes that connecting many MCP servers creates
enough tool context to motivate code-execution patterns that reduce it [Anthropic 2026c].
The same variables bound the CLI side too: a CLI that dumps huge raw output (verbose
logs, untrimmed JSON, stack traces) can cost more than a well-scoped MCP tool. The
engineering discipline is to keep tool registries small and outputs trimmed, on whichever
surface — but the CLI starts from a structurally lower baseline because it carries no registry.
Reading the published reports through that model rather than as one number yields the
following shape:
Workload

MCP token cost vs a lean
CLI call

What drives it

tool,

≈ 1.2×–2×

one tool’s schema + one
structured result

Multi-step task, several
tools loaded

≈ 2×–6×

a registry of many tool descriptions + per-step JSON

Large / noisy tool registry

> 10×

registry tokens dominate
the context window

Single

well-scoped
atomic action

12

Workload

MCP token cost vs a lean
CLI call

What drives it

CLI with trimmed output

baseline

command text + concise
stdout

CLI with huge raw output

can exceed MCP

undisciplined stdout (logs,
dumps, stack traces)

Table 1: MCP-versus-CLI token overhead as a function of tool count, schema verbosity, and result
size — not a fixed ratio. The bands are indicative (reasoned from the cost model above); the measured
data points are the three benchmarks cited below.
The headline practitioner benchmarks sit at the high end of this range, exactly as their
conditions predict: a controlled matched-task benchmark reports ≈35× more tokens via
MCP than via CLI (with task-completion reliability dropping from 100% to 72% on harder
scenarios) [MindStudio 2026]; a single GitHub language-check costs ~1,365 tokens via gh
against ~44,026 via the matching MCP server [Vensas 2026]; and a GitHub MCP server
exposing 93 tools adds ~55,000 tokens of registry overhead at session start versus ~200
for the gh equivalent [Reinhard 2026]. These are large-catalogue, many-call measurements
— we report them as the upper end of the model above, not as a universal ratio. The
directional claim is invariant across the whole range: MCP carries fixed-and-variable token
overhead that CLI does not, and that overhead compounds across repeated agent calls.
Token volume is not the only axis, and arguably not the deepest one. A second, qualitative
difference is composability. An MCP tool returns a fixed result structure that the model
must take into context whole and then filter by reasoning over it; a CLI returns a stream
that the model can compose with the shell’s own filters — piping through jq, grep, head,
or a one-off script — so that the model narrows the result before the bytes ever enter the
context window. The practitioner argument is that this makes context pollution the default
failure mode of MCP and an avoidable one under CLI: “as a model I always have to get the
huge blob back… but if I would build the same as a CLI… it could just add a JQ command and
filter itself… you have no context pollution” [Steinberger 2026]. The same source notes the
historical value MCP nonetheless delivered — it pushed providers to expose APIs that a
CLI can now be written over — and concedes the case where MCP’s stateful session model
genuinely fits, the canonical example being browser automation [Steinberger 2026]. We
treat that as the boundary condition, not the refutation: CLI is the default surface; MCP
earns its place where a tool requires sustained stateful interaction the shell idiom does not
model cleanly.
The liteshell pattern — a name for a convergent practice. When the custom agent
runs inside a cloud application — FastAPI, Spring Boot, Django, Express — there is no
host shell to invoke. Engineers building custom agents through 2024–2026 have been
convergently rediscovering the same workaround, and it is an old one with a name: the

13

Facade [Gamma et al. 1994] — a single, simplified interface placed in front of a complex
subsystem. A liteshell is that Facade, with two specifics that make it worth its own name:
the simplified interface it presents is CLI-shaped, and the consumer it presents it to is
the LLM. Concretely: build a small in-process facade that presents itself to the LLM as if it
were a CLI, then dispatch each “invocation” to a Python method or a loopback call against
the application’s own REST API. The model sees call_cli tickets list --status=open;
the host parses the string, dispatches, returns the result as a tool message. The shape is
one tool in tools[] (the dispatch tool), one auth setup at library init, and one short skill
(markdown) with two one-shot examples — enough for the model to extrapolate the rest
from its pretraining exposure to shell idioms.
The contribution here is naming, not invention — we did not invent these; we named them,
in the lineage of [Gamma et al. 1994], where Design Patterns did not invent the patterns
it described but gave them a vocabulary that thirty years of software engineering then
borrowed. We give this pattern the name liteshell because, to our knowledge, no widelyadopted name exists for it, and its underlying components are decidedly not novel: the
Facade pattern is thirty years old [Gamma et al. 1994]; code-execution tools that give the
LLM a single dispatch surface — Anthropic’s Computer Use with its bash and computer
tools [Anthropic 2024c], HuggingFace’s SmolAgents with the tools-as-code pattern [HuggingFace 2024] — predate this paper and embody the same structural move (collapse the
tool surface to one execution tool; let the model author what to invoke); the Anthropic
Skills format [Anthropic 2025] provides the markdown-skill convention we use to teach
the model the invocation grammar; and GitHub’s gh and Google’s gws are external liteshells
the engineering community has already standardised on, distributed as packaged binaries
rather than as a class inside the engineer’s own application. What this paper adds is the
name, the locating, and the worked example.
Why the name earns its place. The liteshell carries the CLI-over-MCP token argument
into the cloud-runtime case. The benchmarks above measured external CLIs (gh, gws); the
liteshell extends the same advantage to where no host shell exists, because the model still
treats the in-process facade as a CLI and applies the same pre-trained shell knowledge.
Naming the pattern makes it a deliberate engineering choice rather than an accident of
implementation.
The agent loop. A minimal tool-calling loop can be implemented directly in a small
amount of host-language code, with most additional complexity living in dispatch, persistence, and security scaffolding rather than the loop body itself [Anthropic 2024]. The
structure:
messages = []
while True:
response = llm.chat(
tools=tools,
system=system_prompt,
messages=messages,

# static, declared at init
# static, set at session start
# grows append-only

14

)
if not response.tool_calls:
return response.content
for tc in response.tool_calls:
result = dispatch(tc)
# scaffolding's responsibility
messages.append(assistant_turn(tc))
messages.append(tool_result(result))

Listing 1: A minimal agent loop. The boundary does real work — the LLM thinks and chooses; the
scaffolding does everything else.
Skills, characters, instruction sets. The content layer of P2, living in the system prompt.
Skills are markdown files describing how to do a specific thing — loaded into the system
prompt at session start or on demand, editable without changing code. Characters are
voice / stance / register — they constrain which outputs the model considers plausible.
Instruction sets are rules — the must-dos and must-not-dos in the system prompt’s directives section. Discipline: do not put security in the instruction set. Instructions shape
behaviour; the scaffolding’s allow-list shapes outcomes.
Hooks. The deterministic counterpart to the content layer. A hook is a host-side function
that fires on a fixed point in the agent’s lifecycle — most importantly before a tool
call executes (pre-tool-use), but also on session start, on tool result, or before output is
returned. Where instructions and skills steer the model probabilistically, a hook enforces
outcomes in ordinary code: it is where the allow-list is actually checked, where a requested
call_cli is admitted or denied, where a skill or a tool argument can be scanned before
it is trusted (a deployed instance of this pattern scans every contributed skill through a
malware-detection service before the agent may load it [Steinberger 2026]). Hooks are the
mechanism that makes the §3.2 discipline — security lives in the scaffolding, not the prompt
— concrete: the instruction set expresses intent, the hook is the gate. P4 (§3.4) shows the
pre-tool-use hook folded into the loop.
Acceptance. The engineer can name each of these blocks and pick the right one for a given
problem. Has implemented at least one custom tool with proper schema; has driven the
agent loop manually (without a framework) for at least one toy problem.
Anti-mandate. Adopting a framework before this vocabulary is internalised is the most
common path to opaque failure modes later. Frameworks remain a defensible engineering
choice once the building blocks are in hand (see §7); before that, framework adoption
typically substitutes API fluency for principle fluency.
3.3 P3 — Prototype with a general-purpose agent
P3 is where the methodology becomes a practice rather than a body of knowledge. The
move: use a general-purpose agent — Claude Code, OpenCode, Cursor — as a pairprogramming partner and reconnaissance tool, with the explicit goal of building a custom
agent for a specific application.

15

The reconnaissance step. Before any custom agent code is written, the general-purpose
agent surveys the platform the engineer is building inside. For the AAC build (see §6), this
was the first session: Claude Code walked LAMB through its existing lamb-cli tool — lamb
assistant list, lamb model list, lamb kb list. The first gap discovered was that no lamb
rubric command existed, even though assistants referenced rubrics. The reconnaissance
step exposes what is missing before the custom-agent design begins.
Architecture-discovered-by-building. The classical software-engineering move is to design the architecture first, then build to specification. The methodology’s move is to build
first and let the architecture emerge from what works and what does not. Three things
engineers commonly discover this way: where their data actually lives (often not where
the design diagram says); what tool surface the LLM can drive cleanly (often coarser than
the platform’s API surface); and where the security boundary belongs (almost always at
the scaffolding’s tool dispatch, not in the prompt). The reconnaissance pass produces a
working prototype, a list of needed tools, a first draft of the system prompt, and a list
of gaps.
Tools and security in P3. Tool dispatch is in host code, not in the model’s text. Allow-list
everything — the model can request call_cli ls /tmp; the host code decides whether ls /
tmp is allowed.
A note on secrets: never expose a secret to the model, never persist one in a prompt,
never log one in plaintext. When the agent needs a credential, fetch it from an approved
secret store at runtime and pass it only over an authenticated, secure channel. A
common manifestation is operating-system keychain integration: the credential lives in
the keychain, the runtime fetches it on demand, and it never appears as a string in tool
arguments, the system prompt, or model output. These are not implementation details;
they are the methodology’s security contract, established in P3 and inherited by P4.
Acceptance. A working prototype demonstrates the agent’s core loop against the real
platform. A list of tools — pre-existing CLIs and new liteshell entries — is in hand. A first
draft of the system prompt with one or two skills loaded exists. A documented list of gaps
(missing APIs, security boundary questions, ambiguous authorisation cases) is recorded.
Anti-mandate. Do not skip P3 because the architecture is already known. It is not. The
architecture emerges from the build; the few hours of reconnaissance save days of P4
rework.
3.4 P4 — Harvest, fold, ship as CLI (the Turtle pattern)
P4 is the engineering phase: take what was discovered in P3 and produce the production
agent. The phase has three movements: harvest, fold, and ship as CLI.
Harvest. From P3′s working prototype: tools (schemas + implementations, pulled into a
clean tools/ directory); security scaffolding (the allow-list, secret-retrieval setup, authorisation policy); skills (promoted from loose snippets to first-class version-controlled

16

markdown files); characters (promoted from experimental phrasing to explicit persona
content); instruction sets (rules, the directives section). The prototype’s system prompt is
usually a mess of inline instructions; harvest is a deliberate collection step.
Fold into a small loop. The reference shape generalises Listing 1 with two additions, both
promoted from prototype to first-class: a session store that persists the growing messages[]
list between turns under a session id, and a pre-tool-use hook — the explicit security check
that runs in host code on every tool call the model emits, before the tool actually executes
(the Hooks block of §3.2, now doing its real work). Listing 2 shows the hook folded into the
loop: the only change to the body is that dispatch is now gated by the hook, which admits
or denies the call deterministically before any side effect occurs. Everything else is the
surrounding state-and-policy machinery that graduates from “the prototype’s shortcut” to
“the production agent’s discipline”. The cache discipline from P1 is preserved by construction:
tools immutable at instantiation, system immutable per session, messages append-only.
for tc in response.tool_calls:
if pre_tool_use_hook(tc):
# deterministic security gate
result = dispatch(tc)
# allowed → execute
else:
result = denied(tc)
# blocked before any side effect
messages.append(assistant_turn(tc))
messages.append(tool_result(result))

Listing 2: the pre-tool-use hook folded into the loop body of Listing 1. The agent still proposes the
call; the hook — ordinary host code, not a model decision — decides whether it runs. This is where
the allow-list lives, and why authorisation never belongs in the prompt.
Ship as a CLI tool — the Turtle pattern.
The defining move of P4: the agent is itself a CLI tool. Not a chat window in a browser,
not a hidden endpoint on a backend, not an SDK to be imported elsewhere. A commandline program with a stable invocation shape:
turtle "do thing"
→ response + new-session-id
turtle <session-id> "do next thing"
→ continues the session
turtle --list-sessions
turtle <session-id> --replay
→ re-runs the session (traceable; reproducibility caveat below)

Listing 3: the Turtle-pattern CLI invocation shape — stateless calls, session-keyed continuation,
replay, and --help for the next agent.
We name this the Turtle pattern. The name points, deliberately, to three things at once.
The proximate reference is the turtles all the way down image that gives the methodology
its name and that anchors P5 (§3.5). The deeper reference is Seymour Papert’s Logo
turtle [Papert 1980], the canonical educational-programming primitive — children’s first

17

encounter with autonomous symbolic action, and the historical antecedent of the agentas-instructable-actor framing. The third is more practical: a CLI is, by construction, a tool
that another agent can drive.
The agent has:
• Stateless invocation per call (the session store is the state-holding surface).
• Session-id-keyed continuation for multi-turn use.
• Structured outputs — the response itself + the session id + optionally a JSON sidecar
with tool traces.
• --help that works — both for human readers and for the agent driver in P5.
A reproducibility caveat: the --replay flag should be framed as traceable or approximately
reproducible rather than as a deterministic re-run guarantee. Bit-exact determinism across
LLM invocations requires provider-specific guarantees, fixed seeds where supported, and
matching runtime versions; in practice replay is most useful for inspection, diff-againstrerun, and behavioural debugging rather than as a regression-test substitute.
The design constraint: the agent must be built so that it is friendly for the other agent to drive.
A chat-window-in-a-corner deployment is not testable by another agent. A CLI is. This
single discipline — built for the next agent to drive — shapes the I/O surface choices that
make P5 tractable.
Acceptance. The agent has a CLI invocation that returns reliably. Sessions persist, can be
resumed, can be replayed (as a trace, not as a bit-exact rerun). Tools, system prompt, skills,
characters live in version-controlled files (markdown for skills/characters; host-language
code for tools; structured config for security). Security is enforced in the scaffolding’s tool
dispatcher, not in the prompt. The CLI’s output is parseable enough that a general-purpose
agent can drive it — see §3.5.
Anti-mandate. Do not put authorisation logic in the prompt. (This is the AAC build’s
most-repeated lesson — see §6.) Do not ship without --help working; that removes the
next agent’s onboarding surface.
3.5 P5 — Agent-tests-agent
P5 is the methodology’s novel piece. Classical software-engineering testing — typing,
unit tests, integration tests, end-to-end tests — was developed for deterministic software.
Agents are stochastic; they have a behavioural surface that classical testing cannot exercise cleanly. Deterministic tests remain necessary for invariants, interfaces, and failure
handling, but agentic behaviour also benefits from scenario-based behavioural evaluation.
The closing image, again: agents all the way down. The custom agent is tested by another
agent. That testing agent is itself driven by an agent. The principle is recursion, not
paradox.
The pattern. A general-purpose CLI agent (Claude Code, OpenCode) is given three inputs:
(i) a scenario — natural-language description of a task the custom agent should be able to

18

handle; (ii) the custom agent’s CLI invocation (the Turtle interface from §3.4); and (iii) an
evaluation rubric describing what counts as a pass, what counts as a fail, what edge cases
to probe.
The general-purpose agent then drives the custom agent through the scenario, observes
outputs and tool traces, probes edge cases (adversarial inputs, ambiguous requests, multiturn drift), and returns a structured evaluation: pass/fail per criterion, with evidence
quotes from the transcript. The published Reflexion line [Shinn et al. 2023] anticipates the
verbal-feedback aspect of this pattern; what is added here is naming the discipline, locating
it in the methodology’s sequence, and pairing it with a CLI artifact designed to be driven.
What this gives. Four properties classical testing cannot:
1. Behavioural regression testing. “Does the agent still refuse to leak credentials when asked
cleverly?” is not a unit test; it is a P5 test.
2. LLM-comparison testing. Same scenario, different backbone — different providers,
different model sizes — produces apples-to-apples behavioural comparison under a
controlled scenario suite.
3. Documentation generation as a side effect. The evaluation agent’s transcripts are
example interactions; the good ones flow into the documentation.
4. The improvement loop. Failures reveal gaps; gaps go back into P3 as next-iteration
prototypes; the methodology cycles (see §4).
§6 instantiates this discipline against the AAC build: driving the custom agent with a
general-purpose agent surfaced a catalogue of behavioural defects that narrow developer
tests had missed (Tables 3 and 4), each generalising to an anti-mandate — concrete
evidence of what P5 catches that classical testing does not.
The post-build refactor elicitation. A lightweight, high-yield variant of the improvement
loop runs at the end of every build or change, not only when a test fails. The engineer
asks the general-purpose agent that just produced the work a deliberately retrospective
question — what would you refactor now that this exists? — and acts on the friction it names.
The premise is that some design defects are visible only once the artifact exists and has
been exercised; eliciting them immediately, while the full working context is still loaded,
is cheaper than rediscovering them on the next iteration. The same logic governs the
engineer’s own experience: a recurring point of friction in operating the agent — or in
operating the surrounding toolchain — is itself a P5 signal, and the disciplined response
is to spend the next iteration removing the friction at its source rather than working
around it. This is established practitioner discipline: “almost every time I merge a PR, build a
feature, afterwards I ask, ‘what can we refactor?’ … because then you build it and you feel the pain
points” [Steinberger 2026].
Classical testing sits alongside P5. P5 does not replace classical testing. The two address
different failure modes and are best treated as complementary. The full stack:

19

Figure 3: Figure 3. The testing stack with P5 inserted between classical software-engineering
testing and human review.
The classical layers test that the plumbing is correct (deterministic behaviour, no exceptions, types match). The P5 layer tests that the behaviour is correct (the agent does what a
user needs it to do, refuses what it should refuse, recovers from what it should recover
from). For production deployments, both classes of test address different failure modes
and are best deployed together.
Acceptance. A scenario suite covering the agent’s primary responsibilities exists. A
general-purpose CLI agent can drive the suite end-to-end without manual intervention.
The evaluation output is structured (pass/fail per criterion, with evidence). At least two
backbones have been tested against the same scenarios. The gap list from the most recent
P5 run is the input to the next P3 iteration.
Anti-mandate. P5 is continuous: every change to tools, system prompt, skills, or character
should re-run the scenario suite. Testing the tools individually is unit testing; agent-testsagent is behavioural testing; they exercise different failure modes and are not substitutes.

20

4. The methodology is the cycle
Once preconditions P1 and P2 are in the engineer’s hands, the methodology is the cycle
P3 → P4 → P5 → P3 — and the engineer spends the rest of the agent’s life inside it. §3
presented the phases sequentially because they have to be introduced sequentially; this
section names what the phases become operationally, which is a single cyclic practice with
three named stations.

Figure 4: Figure 4. The methodology after preconditions — the practice is the cycle P3 → P4 →
P5 → P3. The engineer iterates indefinitely; P1 and P2 do not re-enter the loop because they were
internalised once.
The structural property the cycle inherits from the preconditions. The cycle is cheap
because of P1. Most of the agent’s prefix (tools + system) does not change between
iterations, so cache hits dominate. Under current provider prompt-caching schemes (§3.1),
each pass through the cycle is a small addition on top of the previous pass, not a rebuild
from scratch. An engineer who iterates ten times in a quarter pays about the cost of one
disciplined initial build plus ten thin refresh layers — not ten initial builds.
A back-of-envelope example makes the shape concrete. Take an agent with a stable prefix
(tools + system) of ~20K tokens and ~2K tokens of fresh work per iteration. Without cache
discipline, ten iterations re-pay the full ~22K each time: ~220K input tokens. With the
prefix cached at the ≈0.1× cache-read rate typical of current providers (§3.1), the same ten
iterations cost one full prefix (~20K), ten cached reads of it (10 × 20K × 0.1 ≈ 20K), and
ten fresh deltas (10 × 2K ≈ 20K) — about 60K effective input tokens, under a third. The
numbers are illustrative; the direction is structural. The larger and more stable the prefix,
the more the cycle rewards cache discipline.
Why iteration matters substantively, not just economically. In our experience building
the AAC, each pass through the cycle made the agent measurably more capable: a single
pass produced a less capable agent than three passes, and three passes a less capable agent
than one re-tested every release. We report this as an observation from the construction
period rather than a controlled result. The reason is that P5 (agent-tests-agent) is the only
place in the methodology that surfaces behavioural defects — defects classical testing
was not designed to detect, in a stochastic substrate that classical testing does not exercise.
Each cycle is a behavioural-quality bump. Skipping the cycle is choosing to ship the
version of the agent that has been least exposed to other agents’ attempts to break it.

21

Why this cycle remains tractable at production scale. Cheap iteration on a transparent
small loop survives the production calendar because the iteration cost does not include
re-learning a framework’s evolving abstractions. A framework refactor between minor
versions (LangChain v0.x → v0.y, observed multiple times during 2024–2025) imposes an
iteration tax on every team using the framework, independent of any change to the team’s
own agent. A framework-free cycle, built on stable primitives (function-calling APIs, MCP,
CLI semantics), carries no such tax. The engineer’s iteration cost is bounded by their own
substrate, not by an upstream maintainer’s release schedule.
The over-orchestration trap. There is a characteristic maturity arc in how engineers
structure agentic work, and the methodology is calibrated to its endpoint. Newcomers
begin with short, direct prompts; as they gain fluency they tend to over-build — elaborate
multi-agent orchestration, long chains of bespoke sub-agents, large libraries of custom
commands — on the assumption that sophistication scales with machinery; the most
experienced practitioners then converge back on short prompts and a small, transparent
loop, having found that the elaborate middle stage mostly adds failure surface. One
practitioner names this middle stage the agentic trap [Steinberger 2026]. The P3 → P4 →
P5 cycle deposits the engineer at the far end of that arc by construction: the deliverable of
P4 is a single small loop, and the corollary of §5 derives multi-agent structure as plain CLI
composition rather than as a dedicated orchestration layer. The trap is real and common;
the methodology avoids it not by exhortation but by the shape of the practice.
A note on stopping. The methodology does not name an end-state. There is no “completed” agent under this practice; there are versions of the agent that have passed the most
recent scenario suite under the current LLM backbone. “Done” is a release decision the
engineer takes against acceptable behavioural-defect density on the latest P5 run, not a
state the methodology promises. This is honest about the artifact’s nature: a custom agent
is a living artifact, like a service or a library that depends on an evolving runtime — its
quality is maintained by ongoing iteration, not certified at a single point in time.

5. Orchestration as CLI composition — the Turtle corollary
The methodology produces, in P4, a custom agent shipped as a CLI. The agent has call_cli
in its tool list, used in P3 and P4 to invoke the platform’s existing CLIs (gh, gws, lamb-cli,
the liteshell). It follows immediately that another agent’s CLI is just another tool. There
is no architectural distinction between:
• call_cli gh issue list --label bug
• call_cli donatello "review this PR for security concerns"
• call_cli leonardo --strategy "decompose this multi-step task"
All three are: parent emits a structured tool call → scaffolding dispatches → subprocess
runs → output captured → result becomes a tool-result message in the parent’s message

22

stream. The parent does not know whether it called a Go binary, a bash script, or another
LLM under the hood. The CLI contract is the orchestration interface.
Multi-agent orchestration in this methodology is therefore not a phase — it is a corollary.
The agents built under P4 compose with one another because they compose the way every
other CLI composes.
5.1 What the corollary gives
1. Heterogeneous backbones. A supervisor running on one provider’s flagship can delegate to a research worker on a different provider, and a verification worker on a local
model — the parent does not care; each child’s CLI is the contract.
2. Process isolation. A child that crashes or hangs does not crash the parent — the parent
sees a failed call_cli (non-zero exit or timeout) and recovers, and the child’s memory
is reclaimed by the operating system when it exits (see the shared-host caveat below).
3. Independent deployability. A new version of the writer agent replaces the old one
without touching the orchestrator. The CLI surface is the API.
4. Parallelism via the shell. turtle "X" & turtle "Y" & wait — the primitive bash has
provided for decades. The parent batches invocations and the scaffolding parallelises
at dispatch.
5. Composition with non-agent CLIs. An orchestrator calls a Turtle calls kubectl calls
another Turtle calls gh. Agents are not a special node type in the orchestration graph —
they are CLIs with stochastic behaviour. Most frameworks silo agent-to-agent flow into
one abstraction layer and tool-use into another; here they share one surface.
6. Replayability and audit. Each agent has a transcript. The parent’s transcript references
children by invocation. Grep, diff, replay — the trace surface is the same one used for
single-agent debugging.
A shared-host caveat — for (2) and (4). Process isolation and shell parallelism are fault- and
composition-level properties, not resource-level ones. When the orchestrator and its children
share a host, memory, CPU, and file descriptors are common: a child that exhausts RAM
can trigger the host out-of-memory killer. The kernel picks its victim by heuristics, and may
kill the parent or an unrelated process rather than the offending child. Unbounded &-fanout only multiplies the pressure. Resource isolation is therefore not free; the scaffolding
must impose it, with per-child limits (ulimit / setrlimit RLIMIT_AS, a cgroup memory.max,
a container, or a separate host) and a concurrency cap on parallel children. This is the
same scaffolding discipline as the recursion-depth budget (§5.4): the substrate gives fault
isolation; resource isolation is bought.
5.2 The Ninja Turtles — a multi-agent topology
A natural specialisation topology, illustrated using a four-character pattern that gave this
paper’s mascot its name:

23

Agent

Role

What it does

Splinter

Orchestrator / master

The parent agent that decomposes the task and delegates. Picks which specialist receives which sub-task.

Leonardo

Planner / strategist

Given an under-specified
goal, produces a structured
plan. Returns a list of steps
with dependencies.

Donatello

Researcher / engineer

Operates RAG pipelines,
web search, codebase inspection, document analysis. Returns evidence with
citations.

Michelangelo

Writer / communicator

Produces user-facing artifacts: prose, code, slides,
summaries. Adapts register to the audience.

Raphael

Executor

The agent with side-effect
privileges: file writes, API
calls, deployments, irreversible operations. Gated
by the strictest allow-list.

Table 2: the Ninja Turtles multi-agent role taxonomy — one specialist Turtle per role, each shipped
as its own CLI.
A typical orchestration: Splinter receives the task, asks Leonardo for a plan, dispatches
Donatello to gather evidence, hands the evidence and plan to Michelangelo to draft an
artifact, and finally invokes Raphael to commit / deploy / send. Each step is a call_cli
invocation from Splinter; each child is a Turtle CLI; each has its own session, its own
scaffolding, its own allow-list. Concretely, from Splinter’s perspective the delegation is
nothing more than calling other CLIs:
# Splinter (orchestrator) — each delegate is just another CLI
plan=$(call_cli leonardo "plan: migrate auth to OAuth-over-MCP" --json)
evidence=$(call_cli donatello "gather: current auth code paths + the OAuth-MCP
spec" --json)
draft=$(call_cli michelangelo "write the migration guide" --plan "$plan" -evidence "$evidence")
call_cli raphael "apply the migration" --plan "$plan" --depth 1
# side effects:
strictest allow-list

24

Listing 4: Splinter orchestrating the specialist Turtles — delegation is plain call_cli composition,
with the plan passed as an ordinary shell variable.
The plan flows from Leonardo into Raphael as an ordinary shell variable; no shared typedstate object, no framework message bus. The naming homage is a cultural reference that
also reinforces the through-line to Papert’s Logo turtle via the Turtle pattern (§3.4).
5.3 Ralph loops as a sub-case
The convergence-loop pattern named after Geoffrey Huntley’s Ralph essay [Huntley 2026]
is trivially expressible as a CLI in this methodology, because it is bash:
# ralph.sh — convergence loop, ship as a CLI tool
goal="$1"; check_cli="$2"; max_iter="${3:-10}"
session=$(uuidgen)
for i in $(seq 1 "$max_iter"); do
turtle "$session" "make progress on: $goal"
"$check_cli" && { echo "converged in $i iter"; exit 0; }
done
echo "did not converge in $max_iter iter"; exit 1

Listing 5: The Ralph loop, packaged as a CLI. The orchestrator invokes call_cli ralph "fix
bug X" check_bug.sh 10. The convergence check is the handoff protocol: the child writes
the artifact; the check reads it; the loop continues based on the check’s exit code. Bash
semantics carry the orchestration logic. No framework primitive required.
5.4 Where the corollary leaks — what frameworks still do better
The corollary covers a substantial portion of multi-agent need, but it is not complete.
Six places where a framework still offers something the bare corollary does not — in
some a genuine missing capability, in others only turnkey convenience over equivalent
engineering:
1. Shared typed state across agents. Frameworks like LangGraph [LangChain 2026b]
give typed StateGraph abstractions where multiple agents share a structured object. CLI
composition requires the engineer to build the equivalent with files on disk or a SQLite
blackboard — solvable, but engineering effort rather than provided primitive.
2. Streaming partial results across the orchestration tree. A subprocess returns when it
exits. For interactive user experience requiring per-token streaming from leaf to root,
frameworks provide streaming primitives; CLI composition requires the engineer to
rebuild the equivalent (typically with JSONL on stdout).
3. Durable, suspendable, resumable workflows. Workflow systems (Temporal [Temporal 2026], Inngest [Inngest 2026], restate.dev [Restate 2026]) provide state machines
with retries, timeouts, idempotency, and durable suspend/resume. CLI orchestration
provides none of those. For workflows with strict resume semantics, framework or
workflow-engine territory.
4. Typed handoff schemas. Frameworks let the engineer declare a structured schema for
inter-agent messages. CLI gives text or JSON; validation is on the caller.
25

5. Unified observability across the tree. Multi-agent tracing tools render a run as a unified
graph; CLI composition gives independent per-agent transcripts that must be joined.
This is the softest of the six, because the hook building-block (§3.2) closes it: a hook that
emits a structured event on every tool call and child invocation into a shared appendonly log lets ordinary tooling join the per-agent transcripts into one trace. The authors
have built exactly such a layer for a multi-agent workshop — hooks emitting presence
and advisory-lock events into a shared store, joined and rendered by a small script-andskill toolchain, released as an open example [Legati Workshop 2026] — so for this item
a framework buys turnkey rendering, not a capability the corollary otherwise lacks; it sits
with (1) and (2) as engineering effort rather than a missing primitive.
6. Recursion depth budgets. A naïve sub-instance can spawn its own sub-instances. The
methodology must declare a depth metric — either as an allow-list constraint or as a
--depth N argument that decrements. The LLM will not set its own depth limit; the
scaffolding has to. Concretely: the orchestrator passes --depth N on every child invocation; the child’s pre-tool-use hook (§3.2) reads it, refuses any call_cli to another Turtle
when N ≤ 0, and otherwise dispatches the grandchild with --depth N-1. The budget is
enforced in host code on the way down, so a runaway delegation chain terminates at a
fixed, auditable depth rather than at wherever the model happens to stop.
These are the criteria for when to reach for a framework anyway (see §7) — a genuine
missing capability for the durable-workflow, typed-handoff, and depth-budget cases (3,
4, 6), and a convenience trade-off where the corollary is already reachable with modest
engineering (1, 2, 5).

6. Internal deployment evidence — the AAC (Agent-Assisted Creator)
The AAC (Agent-Assisted Creator) is a custom agent for the LAMB educational platform
[LAMB Project], built over roughly ten days (28 March – 6 April 2026) by a single developer working with an AI pair-programmer, and in production at two universities since
April 2026: Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC, ~150 educator-creators) and the
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU, ~50). It assists educators — not engineers
— in creating, refining, and testing AI tutors within LAMB without leaving the platform.
The build pre-dated the methodology’s articulation; the methodology was crystallised
by recognising the practice the AAC build had instantiated. The case-study evidence
in this section is internal deployment experience; build logs, the issue tracker, and the
production-deployment record are the primary sources. We summarise the mapping here
and report results that are characterisable from internal logs rather than from externally
reproducible benchmarks.
The mapping is exact enough to be diagnostic:
P1 instantiation. The four practical constraints (cost, hallucination, context, time) were live
engineering pressures from the first prototype; cache-hygiene discipline was developed

26

during the build as the AAC’s token costs revealed where the cached prefix was being
invalidated. The structural framing (tools → system → messages) crystallised post-hoc
while the build was being structured into formal teaching material, when the build’s
empirical cost shape made the structural claim visible against Anthropic’s prompt-caching
documentation [Anthropic 2026b].
P2 instantiation. Function calling drives every AAC operation. The lamb-cli tool was developed in parallel with the agent as a liteshell, exposing the LAMB platform’s assistant /
model / knowledge-base / rubric operations. Skills, characters, and instruction sets were
the artifacts that survived from the prototype’s system prompt into production.
P3 instantiation. Claude Code drove the first AAC prototype against the live LAMB platform. The reconnaissance session revealed that no lamb rubric command existed despite
assistants referencing rubrics — the first architectural gap, surfaced by the act of building.
P4 instantiation. The AAC ships as aac, a Turtle-pattern CLI. Sessions, replay (as trace,
not bit-exact rerun), --help for the next agent — all in place. Security lives entirely in the
scaffolding’s allow-list. The architecture went through three crystallisations during P4,
and the sequence is itself the clearest illustration of architecture-discovered-by-building:
1. HTTP-only. The agent called the LAMB application over loopback REST. This gave
clean request/response boundaries, but it paid a network round-trip on every tool call
and complicated local authentication.
2. Direct-call. The agent invoked the application’s Python methods directly. This removed
the round-trip, but it bypassed the application’s own request pipeline — authentication,
validation, middleware — which then had to be re-implemented agent-side and drifted
out of sync.
3. HTTP-with-ASGI. The agent calls its own API through an in-process ASGI transport.
This recovers the full request pipeline of (1) with the in-process speed of (2), and no
open socket.
None of this was designed up front. Each architecture was adopted, exercised, and found
wanting until the build surfaced the one that held.
P5 instantiation. Driving the AAC with a general-purpose agent (Claude Code) through
realistic educator scenarios — exactly the agent-tests-agent pattern of §3.5 — surfaced
a class of behavioural regressions that the narrow developer tests had missed, and that
internal documentation logs as the “seven bugs.” Each generalises to a P5 discipline and
an anti-mandate. Tables 3 and 4 give four representative cases — Table 3 the failure and
how P5 surfaced it, Table 4 the fix and the anti-mandate it generalises to; the full seven are
recorded in the project’s internal documentation.

27

Bug

Failure (what the user hit)

How P5 surfaced it

Confirmation loop

User picks “1” to approve a
write; the agent re-asks; the
loop never terminates

The driving agent approving an assistant-creation through the numbered menu

Jargon leak

Agent tells an educa­ The driving agent roletor “the debug didn’t re­ playing an educator asking
turn useful pipeline outwhy an assistant failed
put… prompt_processor is
simple_augment…”

Internal fields in output

Agent shows Group ID: The driving agent requestfed28308-… (an internal in­ ing assistant details and integration id) to the educa­ specting the rendered outtor
put

Session resume shows in­ Reopening the page ren­ The driving agent resumternals
ders
[System:
Skill
ing a stored session
startup] as a user message
Table 3: four representative AAC bugs and how P5 surfaced them — a general-purpose agent
driving the custom agent through realistic educator scenarios.
Bug

Fix

Anti-mandate it teaches

Confirmation loop

Replace numbered options
with explicit (y)es / (n)o

The LLM’s output format
and the host parser’s expected input are one contract — do not let them drift

Jargon leak

An explicit negative vocabulary in the system
prompt (name the forbidden words)

Positive instructions (“use
simple language”) are
weaker than a named negative list — do not rely on
them for vocabulary control

Internal fields in output

System-prompt rule list­ Do not pass tool results to
ing which fields to hide the user unfiltered — the
vs. show
model’s instinct is to display everything it receives

28

Bug

Fix

Anti-mandate it teaches

Session resume shows in­ Frontend filter: hide mes­ The stored (LLM) converternals
sages whose content starts sation and the displayed
with [System:
(user) conversation are different conversations — do
not conflate them
Table 4: the fix and the anti-mandate each bug in Table 3 generalises to.
The pattern across all seven is the methodology’s central encode-where-it-belongs rule: critical constraints go in host code (deterministic), behavioural guidance goes in the system
prompt, and a prompt rule that keeps being violated is promoted to a code rule. Tellingly,
every one of the seven was a naming, format, vocabulary, or display defect at the human–
system interface — not one was a crash or a timeout. That is precisely the behavioural
surface classical testing does not exercise and P5 does.
The discipline did not stay with the build. In production, a principal use of the deployed
AAC is exactly the testing move P5 names: educators use it to automatically generate test
sets for an assistant, then execute and evaluate them — and at UPC nearly half of the
~150 creator-users now build tests this way. Agent-assisted behavioural testing is thus not
only how the AAC was built; it is a feature that non-engineers use, at scale, on their own
assistants. The methodology’s testing posture has transferred from the engineer to the end
user — which is the strongest evidence we can offer that the posture is usable rather than
merely advocated.
The AAC’s diagnostic value for the paper: it was built with the right discipline by intuition;
the methodology makes the intuition explicit. A reader following the methodology arrives
at the AAC’s shape on purpose, not by accident.
6.1 Transfer beyond the AAC — agents building agents
The AAC is a single case built by the methodology’s own originators, which is exactly the
limitation a reviewer should press (and §7.5 concedes). The methodology’s first test outside
that team is now under way, and it happens to be the recursion the title names. A developer
who did not build the AAC was trained in the methodology and applied it to a different
LAMB subproject: a Moodle-CLI integration and a rubric-based evaluation agent, built on
the published proof-of-concept for generative-AI-assisted rubric evaluation in softwareengineering coursework [García-Peñalvo et al. 2026]. Following the methodology, that
developer produced a CLI agent that does two things — it applies the methodology, and it
builds further agents: evaluation agents that run complex extract → analyse → synthesise
rubric assessments, generated for new domains. The agent-generated evaluators were
validated against the original Python-plus-LLM pipeline on matched inputs, comparing
final assessments.

29

This is agents all the way down in the literal, operational sense — an agent built under the
methodology building the next layer of agents — and it is, equally, the methodology’s
transferability evidence: the practice was reproduced, and extended, by someone other
than its authors, which is a different and stronger claim than “the authors applied their
own method successfully.” We report it as in progress: the work is pending publication and
will be defended as an undergraduate final project (TFG) in late June 2026, with the report
to follow. We therefore present it as forthcoming corroboration rather than a completed
study, and flag it as such in §7.5. The same transfer pattern is being widened deliberately:
a cohort on a Barcelona Supercomputing Center course (June–July 2026) will be the next,
larger test of whether trained practitioners reproduce the results.

7. Discussion
7.1 Frameworks remain the right choice — sometimes
The methodology does not argue against frameworks. It argues against adopting a framework before P1 and P2 are in the engineer’s hands. Once the substrate and building
blocks are internalised, a framework is one of several engineering tools the practitioner
can deploy with judgement.
A framework remains the right choice when:
• The problem formulation the framework encodes is genuinely the engineer’s problem
formulation. (LangGraph’s typed StateGraph if orchestration genuinely needs typed
shared state; AutoGen’s conversation patterns if agents genuinely converse rather than
delegate.)
• The team coordination cost of the unframed alternative exceeds the technical cost of the
framework. A framework’s value is sometimes located in the team layer rather than the
technical layer — the cost of onboarding, code review, and developer rotation drops
when the team standardises on a known framework.
• The cases identified in §5.4 — durable workflows, typed handoffs, streaming partials,
recursion-depth control — where the framework writes plumbing the engineer would
otherwise rebuild, and the engineering cost of reinventing it is unjustifiable. (Unified
observability is the deliberate exception: §5.4 shows the hook building-block closes it
cheaply, so a framework there buys turnkey rendering, not a missing capability.)
The methodology’s claim is more modest than “frameworks are bad”. It is that frameworks
teach the framework, not the principles. A framework adopted competently after the principles are in hand is a different artifact than a framework adopted before. The methodology
supports the first; it cautions against the second.
7.2 Minimal dependencies as a security posture
Recent supply-chain incidents make dependency risk a routine engineering concern rather
than a purely hypothetical one. In 2024, the xz-utils backdoor (CVE-2024-3094) [NVD 2024]

30

demonstrated how a core dependency could be compromised upstream — with adversarial maintainership concealed for an extended period before discovery. In 2026, PyPI
documented package-supply-chain attacks affecting LiteLLM and Telnyx [PyPI 2026].
PyPI has also reported sustained malware volume and ongoing typosquatting defences
[PyPI 2023]. These incidents do not prove that framework-heavy designs are always less
secure, but they do strengthen the engineering case for understanding and minimising
dependency closure where possible.
A custom agent built on the methodology proposed here typically depends on:
• One LLM-provider SDK (single package, audited by the provider).
• Whatever the application’s existing dependencies are.
• No agent framework.
A custom agent built on a typical multi-framework agent stack (LLM orchestration
framework + multi-agent framework + vector-database adapter + MCP client + evaluation
framework) will typically pull in dozens of transitive dependencies. A direct empirical
comparison is beyond this paper’s scope; a controlled study across roughly a dozen
matched agents — measuring transitive dependency count, lockfile size, and knownCVE exposure per stack — would be enough to settle it, and we flag it as future work
(§7.4). The directional point is nonetheless sound: each dependency introduces additional
attack surface and maintenance obligations, so smaller dependency closures can reduce
some classes of supply-chain risk, independent of any judgement about th