Self-evolving LLM agents with in-distribution Optimization

Yudi Zhang 1 Meng Fang 2 1 Zhenfang Chen 3 Mykola Pechenizkiy 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
While Large Language Models (LLMs) (Achiam et al.,
2023; Zhao et al.), have demonstrated exceptional reasoning
capabilities (Wei et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023), their role
is increasingly shifting from static text generation to driving interactive agents (Wang et al., 2024a). These agents
must move beyond simple prediction to master sequential
decision-making in dynamic environments. By leveraging
the cognitive power of LLMs, researchers have explored
their potential in various interactive domains, including navigation (Song et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2025; Feng et al.,
2025), gaming (Wang et al.; Liu et al.), and robotics (Kim
et al.; Wang et al., 2025). However, achieving consistent
and closed-loop autonomy remains a significant challenge,
as LLMs must effectively bridge the gap between high-level
reasoning and reliable execution.

arXiv:2606.07367v1 [cs.LG] 5 Jun 2026

Large Language Models (LLMs) have recently
emerged as powerful controllers for interactive
agents in complex environments, yet training
them to perform reliable long-horizon decision
making remains a fundamental challenge. A key
difficulty lies in credit assignment: agents often receive delayed rewards only at the end of
episodes. In this paper, we propose Q-Evolve, a
self-evolving framework for LLM agents that unifies automatic process-reward labeling and policy
learning within a principled in-distribution reinforcement learning paradigm. In each evolving iteration, our method learns an in-distribution critic
from a hybrid off-policy dataset that combines expert demonstrations with agent-generated trajectories, stabilizing Bellman backups in sparse-reward
settings via a weighted Implicit Q-Learning objective. The learned value function is then used
to derive step-wise process rewards through advantage estimation, enabling dense and reliable
supervision without environment backtracking
or human annotation. Leveraging these signals,
we perform behavior-proximal policy optimization that evolves the agent over the data used
for process reward labeling, allowing iterative
self-improvement without exacerbating distribution shift. We evaluate our method on AlfWorld, WebShop, and ScienceWorld, showing
Q-Evolve outperforms strong baselines in sample efficiency, robustness, and overall task performance. Our results demonstrate that stable
agent self-evolution is achievable through the coevolution of process-level supervision and policy, both grounded within a shared in-distribution
learning loop. https://qevolve.github.io/.

A central challenge in training LLM agents for interactive, long-horizon tasks is that feedback is often sparse and
severely delayed (Lin et al., 2025; Feng et al., 2025). Agents
typically receive meaningful supervision only at episode termination, making it difficult to attribute success or failure
to individual intermediate decisions (Arjona-Medina et al.,
2019; Ren et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023a). To address this,
recent efforts aim to automatically derive step-wise process
rewards to avoid expensive, hard-to-scale manual annotation (Lightman et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023). For example,
Wang et al. (2024b;c); Lin et al. (2025) rely on extensive online interaction to search and estimate Q-values as process
reward labels, while GiGPO (Feng et al., 2025) introduces
anchor-state grouping to calculate step-level advantages.
A more fundamental limitation shared by existing approaches lies in the reliability of the feedback they consume. In particular, process-level supervision is inherently
distribution-sensitive: process rewards are only reliable on
the similar state-action distribution on which they are derived. However, as illustrated in Figure 1, during online
policy optimization or test-time scaling, the evolving policy
inevitably generates unseen actions even when the starting
state is sampled from the PRM’s training set. This issue is
further exacerbated in dynamic environments. As the agent
interacts with the environment, the underlying environmental dynamics propel the agent into out-of-distribution states,
might leading to a catastrophic distribution shift that in-

1

Eindhoven University of Technology, Netherlands 2 University
of Liverpool, United Kingdom 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab. Correspondence to: Meng Fang <Meng.Fang@liverpool.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 43 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Seoul, South Korea. PMLR 306, 2026. Copyright 2026
by the author(s).

1

Self-evolving LLM agents with in-distribution Optimization

Existing PRM pipeline
Collecting Data for training PRM
• Manual-Labeled: Cost
• Search-based: Discretized states
Two ways for Policy Improvement
• Explicit: online learning
• Implicit: test-time scaling
Suffer from unseen state/actions

No Distribution Shift Methods

100
2-iter, 20K, 90

Online RL
• Not explicitly address sparse rewards
• Only learn from self-play experiences

Performance on AlfWorld

With Distribution Shift Methods

Expert + Self-Train Ours
Given Hybrid Offline Data,
• Estimate Process Rewards via
Bellman Backup
• Improve Policy with PRM labels
Self-Evolve:
Replace Self-Play Data in Offline Data

90

1-iter,
13K, 87

80

QLASS
600K, 80

70
60

SFT
3K, 64

1K

PPO, 26

10K

100K

1M

… online

Environment Steps (Log Scale)

Figure 1. Comparison of existing methods. Left: Existing PRM methods rely on costly manual labels or search-based rollouts requiring
discrete states, often failing due to distribution shifts between PRM training and policy improvement. Upper Mid: Most online RL does
not address episodic sparse rewards. Bottom Mid: Our framework utilizes a hybrid off-policy dataset (expert + agents’ interaction data) to
derive rewards via Bellman backups. By co-evolving process reward supervision and policy improvement within a shared in-distribution
loop, the agent achieves stable self-evolution. Right: A visualization of performance vs environment steps required for collecting data.
Table 1. Comparison with the alternative methods. ✓ = explicitly
supported. ✗ = not supported. SE: self-evolve; N-DS: no need for
discrete state; Bellman: Bellman backup for credit assignment;
PR: assign process rewards. N-EO: no need for extensive online
interaction. Self-train: learn from self-collected experiences.

validates the PRM’s feedback. Additionally, most existing
frameworks rely on restrictive assumptions, such as environment determinism, the availability of state-backtracking,
or discretizable state features for grouping and searching.
These assumptions, coupled with the requirement for exhaustive online interactions, significantly hinder the deployment of such methods in realistic, high-stakes, or nondeterministic scenarios. Therefore, there is a growing need
for methods that both generate and leverage step-wise supervision within the same distribution to keep the process
reward labeling reliable.

Method

SE N-DS Bellman PR N-EO Self-Train

BC
✗
PPO
✗
ETO
✗
QLASS
✗
GiGPO
✗
Q-Evolve ✓

A natural way is to use classical Bellman backups in an
offline manner, which theoretically addresses long-horizon
credit assignment. However, transferring this paradigm to
LLM agents remains difficult. First, in the general episodic
reward settings, the bootstrapping mechanism is prone to significant stochastic noise that accumulates without intermediate signals, preventing stable convergence. This is further
compounded by the combinatorial action space of LLMs,
where scalar Q-values defined over multi-token sequences
fail to facilitate direct policy optimization. Consequently,
rather than optimizing the policy directly, existing offline
RL works for LLMs often resort to using external critics
learned from offline data to re-evaluate or calibrate candidate actions (Snell et al., 2023; Xiang et al., 2024). While
helpful, these approaches treat the critic as an auxiliary filter
rather than an intrinsic objective. This reliance on external
calibration has two drawbacks: it prevents the LLM from
becoming a self-contained agent that can be further evolved,
and it leaves unaddressed the distribution shift between the
offline training data and the policy’s own distribution at test
time.

✓
✓
✓
✗
✗
✓

✗
✓
✗
✓
✗
✓

✗
✗
✗
✓
✓
✓

✓
✗
✓
✗
✗
✓

✗
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓

prior pipelines that rely on static reward models or oneshot offline critics, our framework enables the agent to iteratively improve itself by deriving step-wise supervision
from an evolving Q-based critic and updating the policy via
behavior-proximal policy optimization to avoid distribution
shift. Crucially, this design allows policy, critic, and data
to co-evolve, while each policy update remains grounded
within a hybrid offline dataset, thereby mitigating distribution shift and stabilizing long-horizon credit assignment.
We compare our method with alternatives in Table 1. To
address sparse and delayed feedback, we derive step-wise
supervision by learning an in-distribution value function on
a hybrid dataset that combines expert demonstrations with
agent-generated trajectories. This mixture is crucial for stability: Bellman backups on purely self-generated data can
be dominated by stochastic noise, especially when success
rates are low, whereas expert data provides sparse-signal
grounding that stabilizes the value targets. Specifically, we
estimate an in-distribution critic (Kostrikov et al., 2022),
utilizing a weighted Implicit Q-Learning objective to address episodic rewards. Rather than training a standalone
PRM, we derive advantage estimation as process rewards
via Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE) (Schulman

To address these limitations, we propose Q-Evolve, a selfevolving framework for training LLM agents that unifies
automatic process-reward acquisition and in-distribution
policy optimization within a closed learning loop. Unlike
2

Self-evolving LLM agents with in-distribution Optimization

Process reward models (PRMs) have been studied mainly
for multi-step reasoning problems, such as mathematical
problem solving (Cobbe et al., 2021), where they provide
step-level supervision on intermediate reasoning instead
of relying only on final outcome rewards (Lightman et al.,
2023; Uesato et al., 2022). Early PRMs were trained with
human-annotated process supervision (Uesato et al., 2022),
while more recent work explores computing PRMs automatically, e.g., by treating them as Q-value estimates (Wang
et al., 2024b; Luo et al., 2024). PRMs have been used both
to train generators (Shao et al., 2024) and to enable testtime scaling via beam search (Snell et al., 2024), heuristic
search (Ma et al., 2023), or tree search (Wu et al., 2024).
In contrast, PRMs are much less discussed in LLM agent
settings (Lin et al., 2025; Choudhury, 2025). Lin et al.
(2025) extract Q-value labels by constructing an exploration
tree and Bellman backup as the process reward modeling,
while Choudhury (2025) builds AgentPRM and InversePRM
within an RLHF framework and highlights key challenges
and opportunities for PRMs in LLM agents. However, those
methods all overlook the risk of the distribution shift.

et al., 2016) for policy learning. This approach utilizes Bellman propagation to “fill in” missing intermediate rewards
without requiring environment backtracking or external human labeling. With the step-wise process reward signals
obtained, the policy is then updated via a behavior-proximal
policy optimization (Zhuang et al., 2023), aiming to amplify
beneficial actions and suppress harmful ones. To further
promote generalization, we introduce a more permissive
clipping on the objective’s lower bound, allowing for larger
policy updates when suppressing bad responses.
In summary, our work makes the following contributions.
First, we propose Q-Evolve, a self-evolving framework that
jointly performs automatic process reward labeling and indistribution policy learning, keeping the agent’s single-step
policy improvement strictly within fixed hybrid off-policy
data while enabling iterative improvement toward optimal
long-horizon behavior via critic updates. Second, to handle extremely sparse and delayed rewards, we train an indistribution critic with a weighted Implicit Q-Learning objective over a hybrid dataset, which mixes expert demonstrations with on-train agent trajectories. Third, we perform
in-distribution policy learning via behavior-proximal policy optimization, along with down-weighting thinking and
clipping lower to amplify positive-advantage tokens and explicitly suppress negative-advantage ones. Finally, we evaluate Q-Evolve on AlfWorld, WebShop, and ScienceWorld,
achieving consistent improvements over strong baselines in
sample efficiency and effectiveness.

Self-evolving agents. Recently, self-evolving agents have
gained significant attention, shifting the focus from training static models to developing agents capable of iterative improvement (Gao et al., 2026). Such agents can autonomously learn from experience and improve their capabilities in an open-ended manner. Existing work studies several self-improvement mechanisms, including reflective reasoning and augmenting behavior with memories
from prior interactions (Ouyang et al., 2025; Qian et al.,
2024; Liang et al., 2024; Guan et al., 2024). More naturally,
self-evolution could also be achieved through updating the
training data with agents’ interaction with tasks (self-train),
where agents generate novel experiences without relying on
specific human-provided data (Dou et al., 2024; Guo et al.,
2025; Qi et al.; Sun et al., 2025). Notably, self-evolving
agents are related to, but distinct from, online RL: rather
than requiring continual environment interaction during policy learning, self-evolving agents target practical, rapid policy improvement through iterative updates.

2. Related Work
In this section, we review the LLM agents, process reward
models, and self-evolving agents.
LLM agents. Driven by the rapid advancement of LLMs,
language-based agents have demonstrated strong performance across diverse domains, such as code (Roziere
et al., 2023), math (Luo et al., 2023; Yuan et al., 2023),
game (Wang et al.; Liu et al.; Fang et al., 2024; Zhang et al.,
2025), computer use (Hong et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2026;
Wang et al., 2025) and robotics (Wang et al., 2025). By using
natural language both to reason and to interact with environments, these agents can generalize across tasks and provide
greater flexibility than traditional reinforcement learning
agents (Yao et al., 2022b; Shinn et al., 2023). Recent work
further extends their capabilities through planning (Song
et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2025), and tool
use (Yuan et al., 2025; Lu et al., 2025), expanding the range
of settings where they can be applied. Nevertheless, achieving reliable long-horizon decision-making remains difficult,
with persistent issues such as sparse rewards, credit assignment, and poor sample efficiency (Arjona-Medina et al.,
2019; Ren et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023a; Feng et al.,
2025).

3. Preliminary
In this section, we review implicit q learning and behavior
proximal policy optimization. We take the following example: learning policy from a dataset D, which consists
−1
of trajectories τ = {u} ∪ {(ot , at , rt+1 )}Tt=0
with task description u, observation ot , action at , reward rt+1 and the
historical information ht = (u, o1 , a1 , · · · , ot−1 , at−1 ).
Implicit Q-Learning (IQL) (Kostrikov et al., 2022) is to
learn a critic without explicitly maximizing over out-ofdistribution actions. In principle, there are two separate modules in the critic: a max-Q operator surrogate V (u, ht , ot )
3

Self-evolving LLM agents with in-distribution Optimization
Warm up via Behavior Cloning

Single In-distribution Evolving Loop
Evolve Critic: In-distribution Process Reward Labeling

Expert Data
𝑢, 𝑜$ , 𝑎$ , 𝑟$&'(

LLM Agent
Self-Collected
Rollout in Env
𝑢, 𝑜$ , 𝑎$ , 𝑟$&'(

Evolve Critic: Learning an implicit 𝑸 under offline data support
V-function
Q-function
Bellman Backup:
𝑉 𝑢, ℎ$ , 𝑜$
𝑄 𝑢, ℎ$ , 𝑜$ , 𝑎$
Add higher weight to the samples that:
From success trajectory & near the terminal step
Estimate process rewards 𝑨𝒕 via GAE

Retrospective Labeling on hybrid data
𝑟̃! = 𝑟!"#$ + 𝑟!%&'

• If format invalid: -0.3
• If environment-incompatible: -0.2
• If no changes on observation: -0.1

Evolve Policy: In-distribution Policy Learning via BPPO
Clip Lower: 𝐿! = 𝔼𝒟 min(𝜂# 𝐴$ , clip(𝜂# , 1 − 𝜖low , 1 + 𝜖high ) 𝐴$ )
+ KL [𝜋% 𝜋ref , where 𝜖low > 𝜖high

Enter next loop: Interactively evolving the agents

Figure 2. Framework of our self-evolving agent. We first warm up the policy via behavior cloning. Then, the agent is iteratively optimized
through multiple in-distribution evolving loops. In each loop, we construct a hybrid offline buffer by combining expert demonstrations
with self-collected trajectories, followed by rule-based retrospective labeling to initialize reward signals. In-distribution Reward
Assignment and Policy Improvement: Rewards are propagated via Bellman backups to learn a surrogate of the max-Q operator, from
which step-level advantages (GAE) are derived. These advantages are further redistributed to the token level to enable provable policy
optimization. Interactive Improvement: The overall framework forms a closed-loop evolution process, where the policy, critic, and
dataset co-evolve, while each update remains constrained within the in-distribution data of each evolving iteration.

that approximates an expectile of the action-value distribution induced by the dataset actions, as well as a Q-function
Q(u, ht , ot , at ). Specifically, V is optimized by minimizing
an asymmetric regression loss
h
i
LV = ED Lm
2 Q̄(u, ht , ot , at ) − V (u, ht , ot ) ,

Crucially, we seek to achieve this through a self-evolving
learning paradigm, in which the agent iteratively improves
itself by (i) generating new experience with its current policy,
(ii) re-deriving process-level supervision via an evolving
critic, and (iii) updating the policy in a data-constrained
manner. This results in a closed-loop evolution process in
Q-Evolve, where the policy, critic, and dataset co-evolve,
while each policy update remains grounded within the indistribution hybrid dataset of each iteration.

(1)

where m ∈ (0, 1) controls the expectile level, Q̄ denotes a
slowly-updated target network and Lm
2 (·) is the asymmetric
2
squared loss defined as Lm
2 (δ) = m − 1(δ < 0) δ . Given
V , Q is optimized via:

LQ = ED

h

rt+1 + γV (u, ht+1 , ot+1 ) − Q(u, ht , ot , at )

As shown in Figure 2, we instantiate this paradigm via a
data-constrained inner loop that combines process reward
acquisition and policy optimization, and further enables selfevolution by periodically refreshing the offline data with
newly collected experience.

2 i
.
(2)

4.1. Behavior Cloning as Policy Warmup

IQL does not require an explicit behavior policy and only relies on the dataset actions, which help mitigate extrapolation
errors in training with offline trajectories.

Behavior cloning (BC) offers a simple yet effective
approach to initializing agents by replicating expert
demonstrations. Define an expert trajectory as τ exp =
(u, o1 , a1 , r2 , o2 , a2 , r3 . . . , ot−1 , at−1 , rT , oT ), where u is
the task description, ot the observation at step t, at the corresponding expert action including chain-of-thoughts, rt the
environmental rewards, ht = (o1 , a1 , . . . , ot−1 , at−1 ) the
historical observations and actions up to step t. The expert
dataset Dexpert is then defined as the collection of expert trajectories. Then we optimize the policy πθ by minimizing the
negative log-likelihood of expert actions
conditioned on the


history: LBC = −E(u,ht ,at )∼Dexpert log πθ (at | u, ht , ot ) ,
where θ denotes the parameters of the LLM agent policy πθ
which output the action in natural language. This objective

4. Methodology
To address long-horizon delayed rewards without incurring
the distribution-shift risks of existing PRM pipelines, our
goal is to, given a shared off-policy dataset,
• automatically transform trajectory-level outcomes into
stepwise learning signals,
• improve the policy strictly within the same data used for
process reward labeling,
• iteratively co-evolve process reward supervision and policy through self-evolving loops, progressively approaching better long-horizon performance.
4

Self-evolving LLM agents with in-distribution Optimization

encourages the policy to mimic expert demonstrations by
reproducing the correct action sequence given the task description and historical information. We denote the policy
for this stage as πBC .

for each timestep. In this way, we provide sparse but finegrained reward guidance by penalizing non-executable steps
immediately, which helps disentangle action validity from
task success, promoting the agent to maintain valid environment interactions as much as possible. Please refer to
Appendix B.3 for more details.

4.2. Data Preparation
Long-horizon interactive tasks feature sparse, delayed rewards and frequent execution errors, making it hard to obtain reliable step-wise supervision from raw trajectories.
To enable scalable process-level training signals without
additional environment access, we first construct a hybrid
offline dataset and then retrospectively relabel each step
with auxiliary rewards from textual feedback.

4.3. Estimate Advantage as Process Reward
Below we present how to automatically collect process rewards via advantage estimation, while addressing the challenging critic learning introduced by episodic rewards.
In-distribution Critic Learning. Recall our goal is to
strictly constrain the process reward labeling and policy
learning within a fixed dataset. Therefore, a natural choice is
to adopt Implicit Q-Learning (IQL), which explicitly avoids
learning over out-of-distribution actions. However, even
with principal Bellman Backup in IQL, learning a reliable
critic remains challenging under sparse and delayed feedback: Bellman backups can, in principle, propagate terminal
supervision backward to earlier steps, but this mechanism
often becomes ineffective when episodic rewards are extremely sparse: most transitions receive zero reward, and
the learning targets are dominated by noisy bootstrapping.
The issue is particularly pronounced for weak agents in
early-stage exploration, where trajectories are failure-prone
and seldom reach rewarding terminal states, leaving the
offline data heavily skewed toward low-signal regions.

Hybrid Data Construction. To automatically obtain informative process-reward labels, we deliberately construct
a mixed offline dataset by combining expert demonstrations with the agent’s own interaction trajectories, as each
source resolves a complementary bottleneck in long-horizon
learning. Expert data typically contains the key steps and
successful subroutines required to solve the task, providing
high-quality guidance for both process reward labeling and
policy learning. Meanwhile, self-collected experience exposes the policy’s actual state-action coverage, including
diverse failure modes and locally plausible but wrong actions, so that process supervision is calibrated to where the
agent makes mistakes under its true behavior distribution.
As a result, we obtain a mix dataset D = Dexpert ∪ Dself ,
where Dself is the agents’ rollouts in environment, following
the self-train paradigm (Dou et al., 2024). In the first policy
evolution, Dself is collected by πBC .

To address this, our remedy is threefold, targeting data coverage, learning stability, and signal prioritization. First, we
build a hybrid offline dataset that combines expert demonstrations (to cover successful, high-reward regions) with
rollouts from weaker policies (to reflect the agent’s exploration distribution), providing both informative successes
and hard negatives. Second, we decouple critic learning
from policy improvement by first training an in-distribution
offline critic on the fixed dataset, which avoids a noisy
co-learning feedback loop and yields more stable value estimates for downstream supervision. Third, we adopt a
simple but efficient weighted IQL objective that prioritizes
informative samples by upweighting steps from successful
trajectories and placing larger weights on later steps that are
more correlated with terminal outcomes.

Retrospective Reward Labeling. A distinctive advantage
of LLM-based agents is their interpretable, transparent decision process, where both observations and actions are
expressed in natural language, and the environment often
provides explicit textual feedback. Inspired by this, we leverage this property to perform Retrospective Reward Labeling,
i.e., equip each timestep with rule-based auxiliary rewards
by parsing the observation feedback to identify invalid actions and meaningless actions. The above procedure does
not require access to the environment dynamics, making it
practical and broadly applicable.
Specifically, given an offline trajectory τ ∼ D, where
−1
τ = {u} ∪ {(ot , at , rt+1 )}Tt=0
, we retrospectively detect
execution failures by (i) validating the format of at and (ii)
inspecting the subsequent observation ot+1 , which often explicitly reports invalid actions or execution errors to relabel
each step with an auxiliary reward rtaux ,


rfmt ,
if ot+1 indicates a format error


rinv ,
if ot+1 reflecting an invalid action
aux
rt =

rrepeat , if ot = ot+1


0,
otherwise

Weighted IQL objective. During critic training, we use
env
aux
env
a shaped reward rt+1 = rt+1
+ rt+1
, where rt+1
is the
aux
episodic reward returned by the environment and rt+1
is
assigned by retrospective labeling. We then learn the indistribution critic with IQL (Eq. 1 and Eq. 2), but reweight
each transition to prioritize informative supervision. Concretely, for a trajectory of length T , we assign a step weight
wt = (t/T + d) · 0.5 + 0.5,

(3)

t = 1, . . . , T,

(4)

where d ∈ {0, 1} indicates whether the trajectory terminates
5

Self-evolving LLM agents with in-distribution Optimization

with non-zero episodic reward. This design (i) upweights
successful trajectories (d = 1) and (ii) places larger weights
on later steps that are more correlated with terminal outcomes. We incorporate wt by reweighting the per-transition
losses in IQL. For example, the expectile regression becomes
LV = E wt · Lτ2 (Q̄(u, ht , ot , at ) − V (u, ht , ot )) ,




proximal policy objective:
h

 i
Lπ (θ) = ED min ηt At , clip ηt , 1 − ϵlow , 1 + ϵhigh At
+α KL(πϕ | πref ),
(7)
π (a |u,h ,o )

t
t t
ϕ
where ηt = πold
(at |u,ht ,ot ) is the importance ratio between
the current policy and a lagged behavior policy πold used
to generate the offline trajectories, α ∈ [0, 1] controls KL
regularization strength, and ϵlow , ϵhigh are hyper-parameters.

(5)

and we apply the same weighting to the Q-function regression loss. With these weighted objectives, the critic receives
stronger signals from informative steps, leading to more
stable and reliable value estimates for downstream processreward labeling and policy improvement.

Remark. Eq. 7 follows the PPO-style clipped surrogate, but
differs in how the advantage signal is obtained. Instead of
training an online critic with extensive online interactions,
we directly use the labeled process rewards At introduced
above as step-wise advantages for policy updates. Moreover,
we use an asymmetric clipping scheme with ϵlow > ϵhigh :
we permit more aggressive suppression (larger decreases)
for negatively labeled actions while keeping probability increases more tightly constrained for preventing overfitting.
This encourages conservative, in-support updates that suppress harmful actions without aggressively extrapolating
beyond the offline data distribution.

Obtain Process Reward Labels. Given a learned critic,
consisting of functions V and Q, we use advantage to assess
action quality and treat it as a process-level reward signal
that reflects long-term returns. To obtain robust advantage
estimation, we compute step-wise advantages with generalized advantage estimation (GAE) (Schulman et al., 2016),
rather than directly taking the difference of Q and V .
−1
For a trajectory τ = {(u, ot , at , rt+1 )}Tt=0
and V function,
we have
env
δt = rt+1
+ γV (u, ht+1 , ot+1 ) − V (u, ht , ot ),

At = δt + λγAt+1 ,

AT = 0,

We denote the optimized policy via Eq 7 as πevolved .
Interactive Improvement. The procedure above defines
an inner loop that learns an improved policy πevolve from
a fixed hybrid dataset. While each inner-loop update is
strictly grounded within the in-distribution data of the current policy, the resulting policy can be used to correct the
data distribution and unlock further improvements. Concretely, we use πevolve to interact with the environment and
collect new trajectories, forming Dπevolve , and then refresh
the off-policy dataset by merging them with expert demonstrations: D ← Dexp ∪ Dπevolve . With the updated dataset,
we rerun the inner loop to relearn an in-distribution critic
and relabel process rewards, yielding a stronger policy for
the next iteration. Overall, the pipeline forms a closed-loop
evolution process where the policy, critic, and dataset coevolve, while each policy update remains grounded within
the in-distribution hybrid dataset of the current iteration. In
our experiments, we run two training loops for SciWorld
and AlfWorld, while three loops for WebShop.

(6)

env
where rt+1
is environmental episodic rewards.

We find that excluding raux from advantage estimation yields
better performance than either (i) removing raux entirely or
(ii) also including it in advantage estimation. This design
keeps the process reward aligned with the true task objective and preserves the optimal policy invariant; we refer to
Appendix A.2 for a formal analysis.
4.4. Self-Evolve: Policy Learning with Process Rewards
In order to learn policy from fixed dataset in the inner-loop,
our first attempt is to follow IQL and perform advantageweighted regression
h (AWR) for policy learning via L
i π (θ) =

E(u,ht ,ot ,at ,At )∼D exp(At ) log πθ (at | u, ht , ot ) . However, we found this formulation prone to overfitting: it monotonically increases the likelihood of actions present in the
offline dataset, and provides no mechanism to explicitly
decrease the probability of actions with negative processreward signals.

The complete Q-Evolve procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1.

5. Experiments

Therefore, we adopt an alternative behavior proximal policy objective (BPPO) that uses the sign and magnitude of
process rewards to both upweight beneficial actions and
suppress negatively labeled ones.

Here we empirically evaluate our method and compare it
against a range of strong baselines.
5.1. Setup

In-distribution Policy Optimization. Similar to learn the
critic, our goal is to update the policy over dataset state
and actions only. Concretely, we use a clipped, behavior-

We first describe the experimental setup, including the base
model used for agents and the evaluation environments.
6

Self-evolving LLM agents with in-distribution Optimization
Table 2. Performance comparison on WebShop, SciWorld (Seen/Unseen), and ALFWorld (Seen/Unseen). The best result is bolded and
the second-best result is underlined.
Method

SciWorld

WebShop

ALFWorld

Seen

Unseen

Seen

Unseen

Average

GPT-4
GPT-3.5-Turbo
Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023)

63.2
62.4
64.2

64.8
16.5
60.3

64.4
13.0
64.4

42.9
7.9
45.7

38.1
10.5
55.2

54.7
22.1
58.0

Base Agent (Llama-2-7B-Chat)
SFT (Chen et al., 2023)
RFT (Zhang et al., 2023b)
PPO (Schulman et al., 2017)
Best-of-N
ETO (Song et al., 2024)
DMPO (Shi et al., 2024)
QLASS (Lin et al., 2025)

17.9
63.1
63.6
64.2
67.9
67.4
70.1
70.3

3.8
67.4
71.6
59.4
70.2
73.8
72.4
75.3

3.1
53.0
54.3
51.7
57.6
65.0
61.7
66.4

0.0
60.0
62.9
22.1
62.1
68.6
77.9

0.0
67.2
66.4
29.1
69.4
72.4
82.8

5.0
62.1
63.8
45.3
65.4
69.4
74.5

Q-Evolve (Ours)

70.5

76.3

69.7

90.7

89.6

79.4

Algorithm 1 Q-Evolve

ceives a reward of 1; otherwise, the agent receives a reward
proportional to the number of attributes it meets. S CIENCE W ORLD is a text-based virtual environment requiring the
agents to complete tasks with subgoals, with sparse success
signals from 0 to 1 provided at the end of episodes to indicate the achievement of the subgoals. For ScienceWorld
and ALFWorld, we evaluate both seen and unseen tasks
to investigate the generalization of agents. We report the
average accumulated rewards as the evaluation metrics.

Input: Expert dataset Dexpert ; environment Env; iterations K
Output: Evolved policy πθ
Warm up πθ via behavior cloning on Dexpert for k = 1, . . . , K do
// Stage 1: Hybrid Data Construction
Dself ← rollout(πθ , Env); D ← Dexpert ∪ Dself Assign
rtaux to each step via retrospective labeling (Eq. 3)
// Stage 2: In-distribution Critic
Learning
Train V , Q on D by minimizing LV , LQ (Eqs. 1–2)
// Stage 3: Process Reward Derivation
Compute At via GAE on renv and V (Eq. 6)
// Stage 4: In-distribution Policy
Optimization
Update πθ by maximizing Lπ (Eq. 7)
return πθ

Baselines. We compare our method against three categories of baselines: (1) zero-shot LLMs, including GPT-3.5Turbo and GPT-4 with ReAct prompting (Shinn et al., 2023),
which are directly applied without task-specific adaptation;
(2) fine-tuned LLMs trained without reward redistribution,
such as SFT (Chen et al., 2023), which is supervised finetuning on expert trajectories, and RFT (Rejection sampling
Fine-Tuning) (Zhang et al., 2023b), a self-improvement
baseline trained on merged successful trajectories and expert
data; (3) LLMs with existing reward redistribution strategies,
including ETO (Song et al., 2024), which updates policies
via constructing trajectory-level preference pairs and DPO,
DMPO (Shi et al., 2024), which utilizes a multi-turn preference objective to optimize the agent, and PPO (Schulman
et al., 2017), a reinforcement learning baseline optimizing
the final reward. In addition, we also evaluate inference-time
strategies such as Best-of-N (with N = 6), QLASS (Lin
et al., 2025), which constructs an exploration tree to estimate the Q-value of state-action pairs, enabling planning
on a behavior cloning agent, and closed-source agents like
GPT-4o with Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023).

Agent Base Model and Rollout. We use Llama2-7BChat (Touvron et al., 2023) as the base model for building
LLM agents following Song et al. (2024); Lin et al. (2025).
We list all the prompts used in Appendix B.1. For selfcollected data, we sample 3 trajectories per task, while the
number of tasks is shown in the Appendix (Table 12).
Evaluation Tasks We conduct experiments on three environments that naturally exhibit delayed rewards, A LF W ORLD (Shridhar et al.) for embodied house holding tasks,
W EB S HOP (Yao et al., 2022a) for web navigation, and S CI ENCE W ORLD (Wang et al., 2022) for embodied science
experiments. A LF W ORLD is a text-based embodied environment where agents must complete household tasks
through long action sequences, making credit assignment
particularly challenging. The agent only receives a binary
reward at the final step, 1 for success and 0 for failure.
W EB S HOP evaluates goal-oriented dialogue and decision
making in an online shopping environment, where rewards
are only observed after the action, “click [Buy Now]”. If the
purchased item satisfies all required attributes, the agent re-

5.2. Main Result
Table 2 shows that our method achieves the best overall
performance across all benchmarks, obtaining the highest
average score among all baselines. Compared with QLASS,
7

Self-evolving LLM agents with in-distribution Optimization
Table 3. Ablation study on key components on AlfWorld. RR: Retrospective relabeling; W-IQL: Weighted IQL, GAE: generalized
advantage estimation and PI: One-step Policy Improvement. w/o
PI: using critic in test-time scaling. w/o PI + AWR: using critic
with advantage weighted regression for policy improvement.

which similarly relies on value-based signals, Q-Evolve
achieves substantially higher scores while reducing dependence on heavy online sampling (600K for QLASS and 20K
for Q-Evolve in AlfWorld). In particular, QLASS estimates
Q-values through online rollouts and search, whereas QEvolve learns an in-distribution critic and derives process rewards largely from offline relabeling, enabling more sampleefficient and robust improvements under limited additional
interaction. Compared with ETO, Q-Evolve achieves better
overall performance, which we attribute to a more stable
inner-loop self-evolution that grounds policy updates in a
hybrid offline dataset via in-distribution critic learning and
process-level supervision. Compared with baselines that
do not explicitly address the episodic rewards, Q-Evolve
consistently performs better across all tasks, highlighting
the benefit and significance that Q-Evolve provides denser
and more reliable credit assignment.

Variant

RR W-IQL GAE PI Seen Unseen

Q-Evolve (1-iter)
SFT

✓
✗

✓
✗

✓
✗

✓ 87.9
✗ 60.0

86.6
67.2

w/o RR
w/o W-IQL
w/o GAE
w/o PI
w/o PI + AWR

✗
✓
✓
✓
✓

✓
✗
✓
✓
✓

✓
✓
✗
✓
✓

✓
✓
✓
✗
✓

82.7
76.1
74.6
59.0
67.9

83.6
83.6
74.3
58.6
64.3

without additional environment interaction. Second, w/o
W-IQL, replacing weighted IQL by standard IQL causes
a clear regression, suggesting that weighted IQL improves
robustness of the critic under episodic rewards. Third, GAE
is a key bridge from critic estimation to policy supervision:
removing GAE (w/o GAE) leads to a substantial decline,
highlighting the importance of obtaining high-quality advantage estimation. Finally, one-step policy improvement
(PI) is indispensable for translating step-wise signals into
actual policy gains, which we explain with more details in
the ablation of in-distribution policy learning vs. out-ofdistribution policy learning and ablation on the choice of
policy learning. Together, these ablations validate that (i)
RR, W-IQL, and GAE yield reliable advantage signals, and
(ii) PI is the dominant mechanism that converts those signals
into consistent improvements.

5.3. Ablation Study
In this subsection, we conduct several ablations to investigate the components in the proposed Q-Evolve. Without
specification, we adopt only one interactive policy learning
in the ablation study.
Using process rewards with vs. without support of the
data distribution. We create an ablation version of w/o PI,
using process rewards for out-of-distribution implicit policy
learning, where we use the critic to perform test-time scaling.
Specifically, we rerank the candidate answers produced by
πBC , according to the score from the critic, Q−V . As shown
in Figure 3, empirically, in-distribution policy learning (Full
and w/o GAE) outperforms πBC . In contrast, using critic
test-time scaling does not necessarily help, and can even
underperform πBC , caused by a distribution mismatch. Such
a distribution shift comes from two aspects: first, the models
might provide unseen action candidates that may lie outside
the PRM’s reliable scoring regime; second, the environmental dynamics might push the agent toward unseen states,
which are even worse when the policies are implicitly improved. By contrast, our policy training partially mitigates
this issue by aligning the policy’s learning data distribution
with the PRM’s distribution and relying on generalizable estimation to estimate a more robust advantage. Therefore, it
is crucial to use process reward labels within a controllable,
in-distribution regime where its scoring remains reliable.

Comparison of process reward choice. We compare multiple alternatives for process rewards: one step advantage
Q − V , potential-based shaping renv + γV ′ − V , GAE with
renv , and GAE with renv +raux , given Q and V . As shown in
Table 4, GAE with renv outperforms other alternatives, indicating that multi-step advantage estimation provides more
reliable credit assignment while keeping policy updates
aligned with task success. In contrast, the one-step Q − V
signal is much weaker, likely due to bootstrapping noise in
long-horizon tasks. Potential-based shaping renv + γV ′ − V ,
suggests that advantage could produce better temporal credit
assignment, where V ′ denotes the value estimation of next
timestep. Finally, including raux inside GAE hurts overall performance, showing that heuristic auxiliary rewards
may bias the policy learning, while still being useful as an
auxiliary objective (Table 3).

Ablation on key components. Table 3 presents a
component-wise ablation of our framework on ALFWorld.
Overall, removing any single module degrades performance,
confirming that the final gains come from their synergy
rather than a single trick. First, removing retrospective relabeling (w/o RT) leads to a clear performance drop, indicating that RT provides important intermediate learning signals
and improves generalization by identifying obvious failures

Comparison of policy learning choice: AWR vs. BPPO.
As shown in Table 3 (last row), we construct “w/o PI +
AWR” via replacing the BPPO policy optimization with
advantage-weighted regression, the same as IQL. AWR optimizes a weighted behavior cloning objective, where all actions (including negative-advantage ones) are still imitated,
8

Self-evolving LLM agents with in-distribution Optimization
Table 4. Comparison of different process-reward choices.
Process rewards

Seen

Unseen

Q−V
renv + γV ′ − V
GAE with renv (Ours, 1-iter)
GAE with renv + raux

74.3
80.0
87.9
81.4

74.6
74.6
86.6
82.8

Table 5. Sample efficiency comparison on ALFWorld (Qwen2.57B-Instruct). All online RL baselines use 320K environment steps.
Bold: best result.
Method

100
BC
90
80

Iter-1
Iter-2

Env. Steps Seen Unseen

PPO (Schulman et al., 2017)
RLOO
GRPO (Feng et al., 2025)
SFT
SFT + PPO
SFT + RLOO
SFT + GRPO

320K
320K
320K
0
320K
320K
320K

59.4
56.4
39.7
74.9
72.6
75.0
66.7

67.7
36.6
32.2
62.3
77.6
51.4
74.1

Q-Evolve (1-iter)

13K 88.6

87.3

70

Table 6. Results with Llama-3-8B-Instruct. Best result in bold,
second-best underlined.

60
50
WebShop

SciW-Seen SciW-Unseen AlfW-Seen AlfW-Unseen

Method

Figure 3. Ablation on interactive improvement.

WebShop

SciWorld

ALFWorld

Seen Unseen Seen Unseen

differing only in their effective learning speed via advantagedependent weights. In contrast, our objective uses signed
advantage to explicitly upweight positive-advantage actions
while downweighting negative ones, enabling more direct
correction of harmful behaviors. This ablation highlights
the importance of explicit negative-action suppression in
long-horizon policy improvement.
Ablation on interactive improvement. To isolate the effect
of iterative data collection and refinement, we compare two
consecutive rounds of our self-evolving pipeline, shown in
Figure 3. The consistent gain from the first loop (Iter-1) to
the second loop (Iter-2) indicates that each iteration contributes additional useful supervision, and that the pipeline
can stably accumulate improvements across multiple rounds
rather than relying on a one-off boost.

SFT
ETO
KnowAgent
WKM
SFT + MPO
ETO + MPO

63.3
68.4
64.8
66.9
65.5
70.2

65.3
81.3
81.7
82.1
70.2
83.4

57.0
74.1
69.6
76.5
65.9
80.8

79.3
77.1
80.0
77.5
80.7
85.0

80.6
76.4
74.9
78.2
81.3
79.1

Q-Evolve

71.1

86.4

82.4

89.6

90.3

ETO+MPO. Q-Evolve consistently outperforms all baselines across all tasks and both seen/unseen splits, demonstrating that the method is not tied to any particular model
architecture or initialization.
We also provide an ablation on hyper-parameter ϵlow and
ϵhigh in Appendix B.4.

Sample Efficiency. Table 5 provides an apples-to-apples
comparison against online RL methods on ALFWorld on
Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct 1 as the backbone, where all online
RL methods are trained for 320K environment steps. QEvolve (1-iter) uses only 13K environment steps, while
outperforming all online RL baselines by a large margin on
both seen and unseen splits. Above shows that, Q-Evolve
has better sample efficiency compared with the alternative
methods.

6. Conclusion
In this work, we introduce Q-Evolve, a self-evolving framework for training LLM agents on long-horizon interactive
tasks under episodic rewards. Our key idea is to derive automatic process-level supervision with in-distribution policy
improvement in an inner loop. Specifically, we learn a critic
from a hybrid offline dataset (expert demonstrations and
agent trajectories) using weighted Implicit Q-Learning. The
value function enables step-wise process-reward labeling via
advantage estimation, yielding dense supervision without
backtracking or human annotation. Guided by these signals,
we adopt behavior-proximal policy optimization to improve
the agent while staying within the in-distribution data of the
policy for each iteration, avoiding distribution shift. This
forms a closed-loop process where the policy, critic, and
dataset co-evolve. Experiments on AlfWorld, WebShop, and
ScienceWorld show consistent gains in sample efficiency,
robustness, and task success.

Generalization across model architectures To assess
whether Q-Evolve’s gains transfer across model families
and scales, we evaluate on two additional settings. Table 6
reports results with Llama-3-8B-Instruct 2 , compared with
some planning-based methods, MPO (Xiong et al., 2025),
KnowAgent (Zhu et al., 2025), WKM (Qiao et al., 2024),
1

https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct
https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-8BInstruct
2

9

Self-evolving LLM agents with in-distribution Optimization

Impact Statement

agents. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
15394–15411, 2024.

This work introduces a self-evolving framework for LLM
agents that can significantly influence the deployment of autonomous systems in complex, real-world environments. By
grounding agent evolution in a hybrid in-distribution dataset
rather than unconstrained online exploration, our method
provides a safer pathway for developing autonomous agents
in sensitive domains like robotics and web-based services
where trial-and-error costs are high. The elimination of
expensive manual step-wise annotations and the need for
environment backtracking makes it feasible for smaller organizations to train sophisticated reasoning agents without
massive labeling budgets or specialized simulator features.
Furthermore, the use of behavior-proximal optimization and
KL-regularization ensures that as agents evolve to solve
specific tasks, they retain their foundational language capabilities and do not develop harmful, out-of-distribution
behaviors. Ultimately, our approach demonstrates that process rewards can be derived automatically from episodic
outcomes, offering a scalable alternative to human-in-theloop supervision, which is essential as AI tasks grow in
complexity beyond human monitoring capacities.

M. Fang, S. Deng, Y. Zhang, Z. Shi, L. Chen, M. Pechenizkiy, and J. Wang.
Large language models
are neurosymbolic reasoners.
Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 38(16):
17985–17993, Mar. 2024. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v38i16.
29754. URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.
php/AAAI/article/view/29754.
L. Feng, Z. Xue, T. Liu, and B. An. Group-in-group policy
optimization for LLM agent training. In The Thirty-ninth
Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/
forum?id=QXEhBMNrCW.
H.-a. Gao, J. Geng, W. Hua, M. Hu, X. Juan, H. Liu, S. Liu,
J. Qiu, X. Qi, Y. Wu, et al. A survey of self-evolving
agents: What, when, how, and where to evolve on the path
to artificial super intelligence. Transactions on Machine
Learning Research, 2026.
Z. Guan, X. Kong, F. Zhong, and Y. Wang. Richelieu: Selfevolving llm-based agents for ai diplomacy. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:123471–
123497, 2024.

References
J. Achiam, S. Adler, S. Agarwal, L. Ahmad, I. Akkaya,
F. L. Aleman, D. Almeida, J. Altenschmidt, S. Altman,
S. Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

Y. Guo, J. Lin, H. Wang, Y. Han, S. Hu, Z. Ni, L. Wang,
and M. Chen. SE-agent: Self-evolution trajectory optimization in multi-step reasoning with LLM-based agents.
In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=isATAFP71B.

J. A. Arjona-Medina, M. Gillhofer, M. Widrich, T. Unterthiner, J. Brandstetter, and S. Hochreiter. Rudder: Return decomposition for delayed rewards. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

W. Hong, W. Wang, Q. Lv, J. Xu, W. Yu, J. Ji, Y. Wang,
Z. Wang, Y. Dong, M. Ding, et al. Cogagent: A visual
language model for gui agents. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 14281–14290, 2024.

B. Chen, C. Shu, E. Shareghi, N. Collier, K. Narasimhan,
and S. Yao. Fireact: Toward language agent fine-tuning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05915, 2023.
Z. Chen, D. Chen, R. Sun, W. Liu, and C. Gan. Scaling
autonomous agents via automatic reward modeling and
planning. In The Thirteenth International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2025.

M. J. Kim, K. Pertsch, S. Karamcheti, T. Xiao, A. Balakrishna, S. Nair, R. Rafailov, E. P. Foster, P. R. Sanketi, Q. Vuong, et al. Openvla: An open-source visionlanguage-action model. In 8th Annual Conference on
Robot Learning.

S. Choudhury. Process reward models for llm agents:
Practical framework and directions. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.10325, 2025.

I. Kostrikov, A. Nair, and S. Levine. Offline reinforcement
learning with implicit q-learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=68n2s9ZJWF8.

K. Cobbe, V. Kosaraju, M. Bavarian, M. Chen, H. Jun,
L. Kaiser, M. Plappert, J. Tworek, J. Hilton, R. Nakano,
et al. Training verifiers to solve math word problems.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.

X. Liang, Y. He, Y. Xia, X. Song, J. Wang, M. Tao, L. Sun,
X. Yuan, J. Su, K. Li, et al. Self-evolving agents with reflective and memory-augmented abilities. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2409.00872, 2024.

Z.-Y. Dou, C.-F. Yang, X. Wu, K.-W. Chang, and N. Peng.
Re-rest: Reflection-reinforced self-training for language
10

Self-evolving LLM agents with in-distribution Optimization

H. Lightman, V. Kosaraju, Y. Burda, H. Edwards, B. Baker,
T. Lee, J. Leike, J. Schulman, I. Sutskever, and K. Cobbe.
Let’s verify step by step. In The Twelfth International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Z. Qi, X. Liu, I. L. Iong, H. Lai, X. Sun, J. Sun, X. Yang,
Y. Yang, S. Yao, W. Xu, et al. Webrl: Training llm web
agents via self-evolving online curriculum reinforcement
learning. In The Thirteenth International Conference on
Learning Representations.

Z. Lin, Y. Tang, X. Yao, D. Yin, Z. Hu, Y. Sun, and K.-W.
Chang. QLASS: Boosting language agent inference via
q-guided stepwise search. In Forty-second International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2025. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=f6lio2CZIM.

C. Qian, S. Liang, Y. Qin, Y. Ye, X. Cong, Y. Lin, Y. Wu,
Z. Liu, and M. Sun. Investigate-consolidate-exploit: A
general strategy for inter-task agent self-evolution. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.13996, 2024.

X. Liu, H. Yu, H. Zhang, Y. Xu, X. Lei, H. Lai, Y. Gu,
H. Ding, K. Men, K. Yang, et al. Agentbench: Evaluating
llms as agents. In The Twelfth International Conference
on Learning Representations.

S. Qiao, R. Fang, N. Zhang, Y. Zhu, X. Chen, S. Deng,
Y. Jiang, P. Xie, F. Huang, and H. Chen. Agent planning with world knowledge model. In The Thirty-eighth
Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/
forum?id=j6kJSS9O6I.

Y. Liu, P. Li, Z. Wei, C. Xie, X. Hu, X. Xu, S. Zhang,
X. Han, H. Yang, and F. Wu. Infiguiagent: A multimodal
generalist gui agent with native reasoning and reflection.
In Proceedings of the 19th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1035–1051, 2026.

Z. Ren, R. Guo, Y. Zhou, and J. Peng. Learning long-term reward redistribution via randomized return decomposition.
In International Conference on Learning Representations,
2022.

J. Lu, T. Holleis, Y. Zhang, B. Aumayer, F. Nan, H. Bai,
S. Ma, S. Ma, M. Li, G. Yin, Z. Wang, and R. Pang.
ToolSandbox: A stateful, conversational, interactive evaluation benchmark for LLM tool use capabilities. In
L. Chiruzzo, A. Ritter, and L. Wang, editors, Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
NAACL 2025, pages 1160–1183, Albuquerque, New Mexico, Apr. 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-195-7. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.
findings-naacl.65. URL https://aclanthology.
org/2025.findings-naacl.65/.
H. Luo, Q. Sun, C. Xu, P. Zhao, J. Lou, C. Tao, X. Geng,
Q. Lin, S. Chen, and D. Zhang. Wizardmath: Empowering mathematical reasoning for large language
models via reinforced evol-instruct. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.09583, 2023.

B. Roziere, J. Gehring, F. Gloeckle, S. Sootla, I. Gat, X. E.
Tan, Y. Adi, J. Liu, R. Sauvestre, T. Remez, et al. Code
llama: Open foundation models for code. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.12950, 2023.
J. Schulman, P. Moritz, S. Levine, M. Jordan, and P. Abbeel.
High-dimensional continuous control using generalized
advantage estimation. 2016.
J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and
O. Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms,
2017.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.
06347.
Z. Shao, P. Wang, Q. Zhu, R. Xu, J. Song, X. Bi, H. Zhang,
M. Zhang, Y. Li, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024.

L. Luo, Y. Liu, R. Liu, S. Phatale, M. Guo, H. Lara, Y. Li,
L. Shu, Y. Zhu, L. Meng, et al. Improve mathematical reasoning in language models by automated process
supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06592, 2024.

W. Shi, M. Yuan, J. Wu, Q. Wang, and F. Feng. Direct
multi-turn preference optimization for language agents.
In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2312–
2324, 2024.

Q. Ma, H. Zhou, T. Liu, J. Yuan, P. Liu, Y. You, and
H. Yang. Let’s reward step by step: Step-level reward
model as the navigators for reasoning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.10080, 2023.

N. Shinn, F. Cassano, A. Gopinath, K. Narasimhan, and
S. Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 36:8634–8652, 2023.

S. Ouyang, J. Yan, I.-H. Hsu, Y. Chen, K. Jiang, Z. Wang,
R. Han, L. T. Le, S. Daruki, X. Tang, V. Tirumalashetty,
G. Lee, M. Rofouei, H. Lin, J. Han, C.-Y. Lee, and T. Pfister. Reasoningbank: Scaling agent self-evolving with reasoning memory, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2509.25140.

M. Shridhar, X. Yuan, M.-A. Cote, Y. Bisk, A. Trischler, and
M. Hausknecht. Alfworld: Aligning text and embodied
environments for interactive learning. In International
Conference on Learning Representations.
11

Self-evolving LLM agents with in-distribution Optimization

C. Snell, J. Lee, K. Xu, and A. Kumar. Scaling llm testtime compute optimally can be more effective than scaling model parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03314,
2024.

embodied agent with large language models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research.
L. Wang, C. Ma, X. Feng, Z. Zhang, H. Yang, J. Zhang,
Z. Chen, J. Tang, X. Chen, Y. Lin, et al. A survey on
large language model based autonomous agents. Frontiers
of Computer Science, 18(6):186345, 2024a.

C. V. Snell, I. Kostrikov, Y. Su, S. Yang, and S. Levine. Offline RL for natural language generation with implicit language q learning. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=aBH_DydEvoH.

L. Wang, F. Yang, C. Zhang, J. Lu, J. Qian, S. He,
P. Zhao, B. Qiao, H. Huang, S. Qin, Q. Su, J. Ye,
Y. Zhang, J.-G. Lou, Q. Lin, S. Rajmohan, D. Zhang,
and Q. Zhang. Large action models: From inception
to implementation. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2025. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=bYdKtf0Q31.

C. H. Song, J. Wu, C. Washington, B. M. Sadler, W.-L. Chao,
and Y. Su. Llm-planner: Few-shot grounded planning
for embodied agents with large language models. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference
on computer vision, pages 2998–3009, 2023.

P. Wang, L. Li, Z. Shao, R. Xu, D. Dai, Y. Li, D. Chen,
Y. Wu, and Z. Sui. Math-shepherd: Verify and reinforce
llms step-by-step without human annotations. In ACL (1),
2024b.

Y. Song, D. Yin, X. Yue, J. Huang, S. Li, and B. Y. Lin. Trial
and error: Exploration-based trajectory optimization of
LLM agents. In L.-W. Ku, A. Martins, and V. Srikumar, editors, Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 7584–7600, Bangkok, Thailand, Aug. 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.409. URL https:
//aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.409/.

R. Wang, P. Jansen, M.-A. Côté, and P. Ammanabrolu. Scienceworld: Is your agent smarter than a 5th grader?
In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 11279–
11298, 2022.
Z. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Wu, L. Luo, L. Hou, H. Yu, and J. Shang.
Multi-step problem solving through a verifier: An empirical analysis on model-induced process supervision. In
EMNLP (Findings), 2024c.

Z. Sun, Z. Liu, Y. Zang, Y. Cao, X. Dong, T. Wu, D. Lin, and
J. Wang. Seagent: Self-evolving computer use agent with
autonomous learning from experience. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2508.04700, 2025.

J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, F. Xia, E. Chi,
Q. V. Le, D. Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting
elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837,
2022.

H. Touvron, L. Martin, K. Stone, P. Albert, A. Almahairi,
Y. Babaei, N. Bashlykov, S. Batra, P. Bhargava, S. Bhosale, D. Bikel, L. Blecher, C. C. Ferrer, M. Chen, G. Cucurull, D. Esiobu, J. Fernandes, J. Fu, W. Fu, B. Fuller,
C. Gao, V. Goswami, N. Goyal, A. Hartshorn, S. Hosseini, R. Hou, H. Inan, M. Kardas, V. Kerkez, M. Khabsa,
I. Kloumann, A. Korenev, P. S. Koura, M.-A. Lachaux,
T. Lavril, J. Lee, D. Liskovich, Y. Lu, Y. Mao, X. Martinet,
T. Mihaylov, P. Mishra, I. Molybog, Y. Nie, A. Poulton,
J. Reizenstein, R. Rungta, K. Saladi, A. Schelten, R. Silva,
E. M. Smith, R. Subramanian, X. E. Tan, B. Tang, R. Taylor, A. Williams, J. X. Kuan, P. Xu, Z. Yan, I. Zarov,
Y. Zhang, A. Fan, M. Kambadur, S. Narang, A. Rodriguez, R. Stojnic, S. Edunov, and T. Scialom. Llama 2:
Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models, 2023. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09288.

Y. Wu, Z. Sun, S. Li, S. Welleck, and Y. Yang. Inference scaling laws: An empirical analysis of compute-optimal inference for problem-solving with language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2408.00724, 2024.
Y. Xiang, Y. Shen, Y. Zhang, and C.-T. Nguyen. Retrospex: Language agent meets offline reinforcement learning critic. In Y. Al-Onaizan, M. Bansal, and Y.-N. Chen,
editors, Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 4650–
4666, Miami, Florida, USA, Nov. 2024. Association
for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.
emnlp-main.268. URL https://aclanthology.
org/2024.emnlp-main.268/.

J. Uesato, N. Kushman, R. Kumar, F. Song, N. Siegel,
L. Wang, A. Creswell, G. Irving, and I. Higgins. Solving
math word problems with process-and outcome-based
feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.14275, 2022.

W. Xiong, Y. Song, Q. Dong, B. Zhao, F. Song, XWang, and
S. Li. MPO: Boosting LLM agents with meta plan optimization. In C. Christodoulopoulos, T. Chakraborty,
C. Rose, and V. Peng, editors, Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025,

G. Wang, Y. Xie, Y. Jiang, A. Mandlekar, C. Xiao, Y. Zhu,
L. Fan, and A. Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended
12

Self-evolving LLM agents with in-distribution Optimization

pages 3914–3935, Suzhou, China, Nov. 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-889176-335-7. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.findings-emnlp.
210. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.
findings-emnlp.210/.
S. Yao, H. Chen, J. Yang, and K. Narasimhan. Webshop: Towards scalable real-world web interaction with grounded
language agents. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:20744–20757, 2022a.

W. X. Zhao, K. Zhou, J. Li, T. Tang, X. Wang, Y. Hou,
Y. Min, B. Zhang, J. Zhang, Z. Dong, et al. A survey of
large language models.
Z. Zhao, W. S. Lee, and D. Hsu. Large language models as
commonsense knowledge for large-scale task planning.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 36:
31967–31987, 2023.
Y. Zhu, S. Qiao, Y. Ou, S. Deng, S. Lyu, Y. Shen,
L. Liang, J. Gu, H. Chen, and N. Zhang. KnowAgent:
Knowledge-augmented planning for LLM-based agents.
In L. Chiruzzo, A. Ritter, and L. Wang, editors, Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
NAACL 2025, pages 3709–3732, Albuquerque, New Mexico, Apr. 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-195-7. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.
findings-naacl.205. URL https://aclanthology.
org/2025.findings-naacl.205/.

S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. R. Narasimhan,
and Y. Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in
language models. In The eleventh international conference on learning representations, 2022b.
S. Yao, D. Yu, J. Zhao, I. Shafran, T. Griffiths, Y. Cao, and
K. Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem
solving with large language models. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 36:11809–11822, 2023.

Z. Zhuang, K. LEI, J. Liu, D. Wang, and Y. Guo. Behavior proximal policy optimization. In The Eleventh
International Conference on Learning Representations,
2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=3c13LptpIph.

S. Yuan, K. Song, J. Chen, X. Tan, Y. Shen, K. Ren, D. Li,
and D. Yang. EASYTOOL: Enhancing LLM-based
agents with concise tool instruction. In L. Chiruzzo,
A. Ritter, and L. Wang, editors, Proceedings of the 2025
Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 951–
972, Albuquerque, New Mexico, Apr. 2025. Association
for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-189-6.
doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.naacl-long.44. URL https://
aclanthology.org/2025.naacl-long.44/.
Z. Yuan, H. Yuan, C. Li, G. Dong, K. Lu, C. Tan, C. Zhou,
and J. Zhou. Scaling relationship on learning mathematical reasoning with large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.01825, 2023.
Y. Zhang, Y. Du, B. Huang, Z. Wang, J. Wang, M. Fang,
and M. Pechenizkiy. Interpretable reward redistribution
in reinforcement learning: A causal approach. In A. Oh,
T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and
S. Levine, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pages 20208–20229. Curran
Associates, Inc., 2023a.
Y. Zhang, J. Yang, Y. Yuan, and A. C.-C. Yao. Cumulative
reasoning with large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.04371, 2023b.
Y. Zhang, P. Xiao, L. Wang, C. Zhang, M. Fang, Y. Du,
Y. Puzyrev, R. Yao, S. Qin, Q. Lin, et al. Ruag: Learnedrule-augmented generation for large language models. In
International Conference on Learning Representations,
volume 2025, pages 37697–37720, 2025.
13

Self-evolving LLM agents with in-distribution Optimization

Limitations

Proposition A.1. For all 0 ≤ t ≤ T − 1,

Q-Evolve has several limitations worth noting. The retrospective reward signals depend on structured environment
feedback and may require task-specific adaptation; for instance, the repetition penalty is meaningful only in environments where repeated observations reliably indicate stagnation. The self-evolving loop relies on greedy rollouts for
data collection, which reduces trajectory diversity over iterations and can cause the policy to converge to locally optimal
but suboptimal behaviors. Finally, while the in-distribution
constraint stabilizes learning within each iteration, distribution shift accumulates across iterations as the policy evolves,
and the current framework does not explicitly correct for
this cross-iteration drift.

env
Afull
t − At =

TX
−t−1

aux
(γλ)l rt+1+l
.

l=0

Proof.
The GAE recursion with AT = 0 unrolls to At =
PT −t−1
(γλ)l δt+l , where δt = rt+1 + γV (st+1 ) − V (st ).
l=0
Since V is the same in both cases, the TD residuals differ
aux
only by δtfull − δtenv = rt+1
. Subtracting the two expansions
gives the result.

A. Analysis of Design Choices

Proposition A.1 shows that including raux in GAE directly
adds a discounted auxiliary-return term to the policy-side advantage target. To see why this changes the policy objective,
consider first the case λ = 1: GAE
to the Monte
Preduces
l env
Carlo advantage, giving Aenv
=
t
l≥0 γ rt+1+l − V (st )
(where the V -terms telescope and V (sT ) = 0). Using only
renv therefore keeps the policy update aligned with
Pthe original environment-return objective J env (π) = Eπ [ t γ t rtenv ]
and does not change the optimal policy. For λ < 1, GAE
no longer equals the Monte Carlo return exactly, but it still
defines an environment-reward
surrogate; the key
PT −t−1λ-return
env
aux
identity Afull
(γλ)l rt+1+l
remains exact,
t − At =
l=0
and excluding raux keeps policy learning aligned with this
environment-reward surrogate alone. This is corroborated
empirically in Table 4.

A.1. Retrospective reward design.
The auxiliary reward values are set according to three principles that govern their interaction with the primary task
signal: (i) small magnitude relative to the extrinsic reward,
so that policy learning prioritizes task completion rather
than penalty avoidance; (ii) non-dominance in cumulative
return, ensuring that auxiliary signals shape rather than
override the episodic reward; and (iii) severity-based ordering, where failure types are ranked by their impact on task
execution—format errors invalidate the action protocol entirely and carry the highest penalty, non-executable actions
violate environmental constraints and receive a moderate
penalty, and repeated or no-op actions indicate ineffective
exploration with the lowest penalty. These considerations
yield (rfmt , rinv , rrepeat ) = (−0.3, −0.2, −0.1).

A.3. Weighted IQL design.

Table 7 evaluates the robustness of these choices on ALFWorld. Performance is stable across alternative reward
scales (RR-alt), but deteriorates substantially when the format penalty is inflated to rfmt = −1 (RR-high-fmt), as it
begins to dominate the cumulative return and undermines
the task-level signal. For weighted IQL, both the temporal
and success terms contribute positively; the temporal term
has a larger effect on unseen tasks, where reliable value
propagation is especially important for generalization.

The step-weight wt in Eq. 1 incorporates two complementary terms. The temporal term assigns larger weights to later
transitions, which have shorter remaining bootstrap horizons
and thus more reliable TD targets under sparse rewards. The
success term upweights trajectories with non-zero episodic
rewards: under extreme reward sparsity, successful rollouts
constitute a small but disproportionately informative subset,
and without reweighting, critic learning would be dominated
by the abundant low-signal failure trajectories.

A.2. Analysis of Retrospective Rewards in Advantage
Estimation

A.4. Memory cost.
Beyond environment interactions, Q-Evolve also incurs
lower training and inference overhead: during policy optimization, only the policy and reference models are loaded
(two models), matching the memory footprint of GRPO,
since the critic’s advantages are pre-computed offline and
need not be retained. At inference time, Q-Evolve requires
no additional critic evaluation, whereas QLASS performs
multi-candidate scoring per step, adding non-trivial inference cost.

We formally justify why raux is excluded from the GAE
used for policy optimization. Let V be the value function
trained under the full shaped reward renv + raux , and let Aenv
t ,
env
Afull
denote
the
GAE
advantages
computed
with
r
and
t
renv + raux , respectively.

14

Self-evolving LLM agents with in-distribution Optimization
Table 7. Sensitivity analysis on AlfWorld (single iteration). Bold:
best result.
Variant

In practice, we can sample multiple steps from the same
trajectory (e.g., K steps) and gather the corresponding hidden states in one forward pass; these pooled vectors are
then fed into small MLP heads to produce V (s), V (s′ ), and
Double-Q(s, a) predictions.

Seen Unseen

w/o RR
83.6
RR-alt (−0.1, −0.05, −0.03)
85.7
RR-high-fmt (−1, −0.2, −0.1) 69.3

82.7
84.3
64.2

w/o W-IQL
W-IQL w/o temporal term
W-IQL w/o success term

83.6
83.6
85.0

76.1
79.1
83.6

Q-Evolve

87.9

86.6

Prediction heads. On top of the routed hidden states, we
use lightweight heads to produce scalar predictions. For
each step, we first pool the routed hidden states at the pre(s)
(sa)
computed end-token positions, obtaining vectors ht , ht ,
(s′ )
and ht . We then apply one value head gv and two Q heads
gq1 , gq2 for Double Q-learning:


(s)
V (st ) = gv ht
,


(sa)
Q1 (st , at ) = gq1 ht
,
(9)


(sa)
Q2 (st , at ) = gq2 ht
.

B. Implementation Details
B.1. Prompts in Experiments
We list all the prompts used in our experiments in Figure 4
(AlfWorld), Figure 5 (SciWorld) and Figure 6 (Webshop).
B.2. Critic Model Structure

Delayed Q network. For stable target estimation in
Bellman-style backups, we maintain a delayed (target) Q
network that mirrors the on-training Q branch. It shares the
same backbone fθ but uses a separate set of EMA parameters (ϕ̄q , ḡq1 , ḡq2 ). Concretely, the delayed branch routes
the input through the target Q adapter

Critic Model. We parameterize the critic with a single
pretrained LLM backbone and route computation through
lightweight LoRA adapters to predict both the state value
V (s) and the state–action value Q(s, a). This sharedbackbone design preserves a common representation while
enabling head-specific specialization, avoiding the overhead
of maintaining separate LLMs for V and Q.

H̄ (q) = fθ,ϕ̄q (x),
(sa)

Let fθ denote the pretrained LLM. Given a tokenized input
x, it produces hidden states H = fθ (x) ∈ RB×T ×d . We
attach two LoRA adapters: a value adapter ϕv and a Q
adapter ϕq . For each forward pass, we activate the corresponding adapter:
H (v) = fθ,ϕv (x),

H (q) = fθ,ϕq (x).

pools the end-of-action representation h̄t in the same way
as the online branch, and predicts target Double-Q values:




(sa)
(sa)
Q̄1 (st , at ) = ḡq1 h̄t
,
Q̄2 (st , at ) = ḡq2 h̄t
.
(11)
The target parameters are updated by an exponential moving
average of the online Q parameters:

(8)

ϕ̄q ← (1 − λEMA ) ϕ̄q + λEMA ϕq ,

The input to the critic is a trajectory formatted as a multiturn chat transcript (user observations and assistant actions)
and then tokenized into a single sequence x = (x1 , . . . , xT )
using the same chat template as the policy. We tokenize the
full trajectory once to obtain the token ids, and for each step
t we additionally tokenize three prefixes of the transcript: (i)
the prefix ending at the current observation (state prefix), (ii)
the prefix ending after the agent action is appended (state–
action prefix), and (iii) the prefix ending at the next observation (next-state prefix). The lengths of these three tokenized
(s) (sa) (s′ )
prefixes define their end-token indices pt , pt , pt (i.e.,
the last token positions of each prefix in the full sequence).

ḡq1 ← (1 − λEMA ) ḡq1 + λEMA gq1 ,

(s)

(v)

= H (s) ,
pt

(sa)

ht

(q)

= H (sa) ,
pt

(s′ )

ht

(12)

ḡq2 ← (1 − λEMA ) ḡq2 + λEMA gq2 .
We apply this soft update every K optimization steps; in our
implementation, we set K = 2 and λEMA = 0.005 for both
the Q heads and the Q adapter.
Optimization with step weights and Double-Q. Each
sampled step t is associated with a nonnegative weight wt
(stored in the offline dataset), which upweights more informative steps (e.g., later steps or decisive transitions).
We train the critic with Double-Q: two separate heads Q1
and Q2 are learned in parallel on the same representation
(sa)
ht and the same TD target. Concretely, for a transition
(st , at , rt , st+1 , dt ) we compute the bootstrap target using
the value branch,

Given hidden states H (v) = fθ,ϕv (x) and H (q) = fθ,ϕq (x),
we represent each segment by the hidden state at its end
position (last-token pooling):
ht

(10)

(v)

= H (s′ ) .

yt = rt + γ(1 − dt ) V (st+1 ),

pt

15

Self-evolving LLM agents with in-distribution Optimization
Table 8. Rewards for penalty.

Task
AlfWorld
WebShop
SciWorld

rfmt
−0.3
−0.3
−0.3

rinv
−0.2
0
−0.2

Algorithm 2 Critic optimization with Double-Q, delayed
Q (EMA), and step weights

rrepeat

(s)

−0.1
0
−0.1

Table 9. Hyperparameters.
Hyperparameter
Batch size
Number of policy training epochs
Number of critic training epochs
Weight decay
Warmup ratio
SFT learning rate
LR scheduler type
Model max length
Discount factor γ
Discount factor λ in GAE
Maximum episode length on WebShop
Maximum episode length on SciWorld
Maximum episode length on ALFWorld
Sampled trajectory number for self-training
Exploration temperature

(sa)

(s′ )

Input: Offline trajectory tokens; per-step indices pt , pt , pt
and weights wt ; discount γ; expectile m; EMA rate λEMA ;
update period K.
Initialize online params (ϕv , gv ) and (ϕq , gq1 , gq2 ) Set target
params (ϕ̄q , ḡq1 , ḡq2 ) ← (ϕq , gq1 , gq2 )
for n = 1, 2, . . . do
Sample a trajectory and select K steps {tk }K
k=1 with weights
{wtk }
Build a token prefix x truncated to the longest selected nextstate prefix
Compute H (v) = fθ,ϕv (x) and H (q) = fθ,ϕq (x)

Value
dynamic
3
20
0.0
0.03
1e-5
Cosine
4096
0.95
0.95
10
24
30
3
2.0

(s)

(v)

(sa)

Gather htk = H (s) , htk
pt

(q)

pt

k

(s′ )

(v)

= H (sa) , htk = H (s′ )
pt

k

k

if n is a Q-update
// update Q
 then
 step
(s′ )
, ytk ← rtk + γ(1 − dtk )Vt′k
Vt′k ← gv htk




(sa)
(sa)
, Q2,tk ← gq2 htk
Q1,tk ← gq1 htk
i
h
P
2
2
LQ ← K
k=1 wtk (Q1,tk − ytk ) + (Q2,tk − ytk )
Update (ϕq , gq1 , gq2 ) by descending ∇LQ
else
// update V
Vtk ← gv



(s)
htk


(sa)

(q)

Compute H̄ (q) = fθ,ϕ̄q (x) and gather h̄tk = H̄ (sa)
pt
k




(sa)
(sa)
, Q̄2,tk ← ḡq2 h̄tk
Q̄1,tk ← ḡq1 h̄tk

and regress both heads to this target with a weighted squared
loss:
i
X h
LQ =
wt (Q1 (st , at ) − yt )2 + (Q2 (st , at ) − yt )2 .

Q̄tk ← min(Q̄1,tk , Q̄2,tk )

P
LV ← K
k=1 wtk ℓexp Q̄tk − Vtk
Update (ϕv , gv ) by descending ∇LV

t

if n mod K = 0 then
(ϕ̄q , ḡq1 , ḡq2 )
←
λEMA (ϕq , gq1 , gq2 )

Using two Q heads helps reduce overestimation and improves stability: when fitting the value function, we form a
conservative target from the delayed (EMA) Q network by
taking the minimum of the two target heads,

Q̄(st , at ) = min Q̄1 (st , at ), Q̄2 (st , at ) ,

(1 − λEMA )(ϕ̄q , ḡq1 , ḡq2 ) +

and typically prevents any meaningful environment transition, whereas the latter reflects a semantically infeasible
choice under a valid protocol. We additionally penalize
non-meaningful actions when the observation remains unchanged after executing an action, which encourages exploration and discourages ineffective interactions; we exclude
cases where no-op behavior is part of the environment design (e.g., the wait action in SciWorld, and unchanged
observations in WebShop).

and update V via a (weighted) expectile regression toward
Q̄:
X

LV =
wt ℓexp Q̄(st , at ) − V (st ) .
t

The delayed Q network is not optimized by gradient descent;
instead, its adapter and heads are updated by EMA from the
on-training Q parameters every K steps.
B.3. Hyperparameters

B.4. Additional Experiments.

We summarize the hyperparameters used across all stages in
this section. All hyperparameters leveraged in our method
are in the Table 9 and Table 11.

Ablation study on Hyper-parameter ϵlow and ϵhigh on Alfworld. As shown in Table 10, larger clipping thresholds
allow more aggressive policy updates. When ϵ is small,
varying ϵlow and ϵhigh has only a mild effect, since the update magnitude is tightly constrained. As ϵ increases, using
a larger ϵlow becomes more beneficial: it enables stronger
down-weighting of known incorrect actions, which reduces

The hyperparameters of the reward penalty are shown in
Table 8. In general, we impose a stronger penalty on
action–think format errors than on invalid-but-parsable actions, since the former violates the interaction protocol
16

Self-evolving LLM agents with in-distribution Optimization
Table 10. Ablation study on hyper-parameters ϵlow and ϵhigh on
AlfWorld. Best in each split is in bold.

ϵlow

ϵhigh

Seen

Unseen

0.2
0.4
0.2
0.4
0.8
0.4
0.8

0.2
0.2
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.8
0.8

77.9
74.3
75.7
80.7
87.9
81.4
86.4

78.4
77.6
81.3
85.1
86.6
83.6
85.8

Interact with a household to solve a task. Imagine you are
an intelligent agent in a household environment and your
target is to perform actions to complete the task goal. At
the beginning of your interactions, you will be given the
detailed description of the current environment and your
goal to accomplish.
For each of your turns, you will be given the observation
from the last turn. You should first think about the current
condition and plan your future actions, and then output
your action in this turn. Your output must strictly follow
this format:
Thought: your thoughts.
Action: your next action.

overfitting to suboptimal behaviors and leads to better generalization on the Unseen split.
B.5. Runtime Analysis
All experiments were conducted on a single node with
4×H100 GPUs. In our pipeline, behavior cloning takes
approximately 5 minutes per epoch, critic training takes
about 1 hour per epoch, and policy learning takes around
15 minutes per epoch. Overall, the runtime is dominated
by critic training, while the policy learning and behavior
cloning stages are comparatively lightweight.

The available actions are:
1. go to {recep}
2. take {obj} from {recep}
3. put {obj} in/on {recep}
4. open {recep}
5. close {recep}
6. toggle {obj} {recep}
7. clean {obj} with {recep}
8. heat {obj} with {recep}
9. cool {obj} with {recep}
where {obj} and {recep} correspond to objects and receptacles.
After each turn, the environment will give you immediate
feedback based on which you plan your next few steps. If
the environment outputs "Nothing happened", that
means the previous action is invalid and you should try
more options.
Your response should use the following format:
Thought: <your thoughts>
Action: <your next action>

Figure 4. The instruction prompt provided to the language agent
on AlfWorld.

17

Self-evolving LLM agents with in-distribution Optimization
Table 11. Hyper-parameters for Iteration 1 vs Iteration 2.
Hyper-parameter
Environment
Token length (max)
Learning rate for Policy Learning
Learning rate for Critic Learning
Epochs for Po