Capability-Aligned Hierarchical Learning for Tool-Augmented LLMs
Haotong Yang and Ting Long* and Yi Chang*
Jilin University
haotong25@mails.jlu.edu.cn, longting@jlu.edu.cn, yichang@jlu.edu.cn

arXiv:2606.09371v1 [cs.AI] 8 Jun 2026

Abstract
high-level planning

Tool learning enables LLMs to invoke external tools to accomplish tasks. Prior studies
have demonstrated the effectiveness of a hierarchical structure: a high-level policy handles global planning and decomposes tasks
into manageable sub-tasks, and a low-level policy focuses on invoking tools to solve these
sub-tasks. However, these works typically optimize the high-level and low-level policies
separately, leading to planner-executor misalignment and limiting LLM performance on
tool-use tasks. In this paper, we propose a
method called Capability-Aligned Hierarchical Learning (CAHL), which leverages RLVR
to jointly optimize both policies, enabling better alignment between the high-level planner
and the low-level executor. Experiments on
constrained tool-use benchmarks (API-Bank
and BFCL) and an open-ended environment
(Bamboogle) demonstrate the effectiveness of
CAHL. Our code is available at https://
github.com/al123123123-123/htl.

1

Low-level execution

Find the average closing price of Apple stock in the past 10 days?
Available tools:
volume_traded(company, date): Get stock's trading volume
closing_price(company, Nday): Get past N days' closing prices
average_compute(data_list): Compute the average of a list of data

average Apple's closing price over the past 10 days.
subtask granularity exceeds low-level's capability

…

Can not handle

1 get Apple‘s closing price for day 1 → 2 get Apple’s
closing price for day 2 → … → 11 average all prices.
subtask granularity fails below low-level's capability

P1Day = closing_price(”Apple”, 1)Wrong tool

(a) high-level planner misaligns with low-level capability
1 get Apple’s closing price of past 10 days → 2 average prices.
result = average_compute( ? )

Wrong order

(b) low-level executor misaligns with high-level instruction
1 get Apple’s closing price of past 10 days → 2 average prices.
price_10_days = closing_price(”Apple”, 10)
result = average_compute(price_10_days)

(c) planner-executor alignment

Introduction

Figure 1: Misalignment between high-level planning
and low-level execution. The planner may generate subtasks that are logically reasonable but difficult for the
low-level executor to realize with available tool schemas,
while the executor may fail to align with the planner’s
underlying intent.

Tool learning refers to the ability of large language
models (LLMs) to invoke external tools (Schick
et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2024a), such as APIs (Qin
et al., 2024b; Patil et al., 2024), web search engines (Lazaridou et al., 2022; Jin et al., 2025), to
accomplish tasks that cannot be solved by text generation alone. For example, given the query What’s
the weather in Beijing today?, directly relying on
text generation alone would likely produce outdated information, since LLMs cannot know realtime weather from training data. To address this,
LLM calls a weather API with the argument (city:
Beijing) and incorporates the returned real-time
information into its response.
However, this single-turn paradigm, where the
model performs one tool call, receives its output,

and produces a final answer, only suffices for relatively simple queries (Yao et al., 2022; Li et al.,
2023). In realistic tool-use scenarios, even seemingly simple user requests may require the model to
coordinate multiple tools with different functional
scopes and parameter requirements. Consider the
query in Figure 1: Find the average closing price of
Apple stock in the past ten days. Answering this requires: (1) getting Apple’s closing price for the past
10 days; (2) averaging those prices. Solving this in
a single turn would lead to incorrect or incomplete
answers, as a single tool invocation cannot cover
the multiple steps required above.

* Corresponding authors.

1

To address that, recent works have adopted hierarchical decision making for tool learning (Xu
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Prasad et al., 2024).
A high-level planner first decomposes the user request into a sequence of sub-tasks (e.g., [search
past 10 days closing price, average the
price]), and a low-level executor then translates
each sub-task into concrete tool calls with appropriate parameters.
However, existing hierarchical methods typically
optimize the planner and executor separately: the
planner is trained to generate logically correct
sub-task sequences based on the query, without
awareness of whether the executor can actually succeed at those sub-tasks. The executor, in turn, is
trained independently to map sub-tasks to tool calls.
This independent optimization leads to a plannerexecutor misalignment: the planner may propose
sub-tasks that are theoretically sound but do not
match the executor’s actual tool-use capability. As
shown in Figure 1(a), an overly coarse-grained subtask cannot be parsed into an executable tool, while
an overly fine-grained sub-task may force unnecessary low-level details that are already encapsulated
by existing tools. On the other hand, the executor may fail to align with the planner’s underlying
intent, as shown in Figure 1(b).
To address the planner-executor misalignment,
we propose Capability-Aligned Hierarchical
Learning (CAHL). Instead of separately optimizing the planner and the executor, CAHL jointly
optimizes them based on Reinforcement Learning
with Verifiable Rewards(RLVR). This joint optimization encourages the planner to adapt the granularity of its instructions to the executor’s actual
capabilities, while enabling the executor to adjust
its strategy to match the planner’s intent. Extensive experiments on constrained benchmarks (APIBank, BFCL) and unconstrained open-ended environments (Bamboogle) demonstrate the effectiveness of CAHL. Notably, CAHL achieves consistent
improvements over strong single-level and hierarchical baselines across constrained and open-ended
tool-use benchmarks. In summary, our main contributions are as follows:

ners and executors to adapt to each other through
verifiable task-level feedback.
• We evaluate CAHL on constrained and openended tool-use benchmarks, showing consistent
improvements over baselines.

2

Related Work

Early explorations of tool learning relied on incontext learning (Lazaridou et al., 2022; Paranjape
et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2023; Cummins et al., 2025;
Xu et al., 2023; Prasad et al., 2024), which supplies few-shot tool invocation exemplars and API
specifications within the prompt to guide LLMs in
invoking external tools. With the construction of
large-scale instruction datasets such as ToolBench
(Qin et al., 2024b), ToolACE (Liu et al., 2025), and
xLAM (Zhang et al., 2025a), supervised fine-tuning
(SFT) became the dominant paradigm (Patil et al.,
2024; Acikgoz et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2024). SFT
enhances the adherence to tool invocation schemas
and precision in following complex API execution
protocols, but recent work shows that these methods fail to generalize to unseen tools and complex
multi-step tasks
(Zeng et al., 2024; Chu et al., 2025; Guo et al.,
2025). More recently, reinforcement learning (RL)
has been adopted to optimize tool use via interaction feedback (Li et al., 2025; Jin et al., 2025).
ToolRL (Qian et al., 2025) introduces fine-grained
reward decomposition, separating format correctness from semantic correctness to provide denser
signals for optimization. ToolZero (Zeng et al.,
2025a) further demonstrates that RL, without SFT
warm-up, can elicit intrinsic tool-use capabilities
directly from base models. In addition, ToolSample (Feng et al., 2025) improves sample efficiency
by incorporating dynamic task sampling and curriculum learning strategies.
Another line of work studies hierarchical tool
use, where a high-level planner decomposes a user
request into sub-tasks and a low-level executor
maps these sub-tasks into concrete tool calls (Xu
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Prasad et al., 2024).
This plan-then-execute paradigm improves interpretability and scalability for long-horizon tool-use
tasks by separating global task decomposition from
local tool execution. However, most existing hierarchical methods optimize the planner and executor
separately. As a result, the planner may generate
sub-tasks that are logically reasonable but difficult

• We identify planner-executor misalignment in existing hierarchical tool learning methods, where
planner-generated sub-tasks do not match the
executor’s actual tool-use capability.
• We propose CAHL, a joint optimization framework based on RLVR, which encourages plan2

high-level planner
high-level policy

Calculate triangle areas:
15×20 m, 25×30 ft, 35×40 in.

optimize

optimize

1 calculate the triangle area for 15×20 m (m²) 2 calculate the triangle area for 15×20 m (m²) 25×30
ft (ft²) 3 calculate the triangle area for 15×20 m (m²) 35×40 in (in²).

name: area_triangle,
tools lib
parameters:
{base: int, height: int, unit: str}
description:
calculate the area of a triangle.

……

low-level policy

optimize

{name: area_triangle, 1
parameters: {base: 15,
height: 20, unit: “m^2”}}

low-level policy

optimize

{name: area_triangle, 2
parameters: {base: 25,
height: 30, unit: “ft^2”}}

low-level policy

optimize

{name: area_triangle, 3
parameters: {base: 35,
height: 40, unit: “in^2”}}

Tool execution

low-level executor

Figure 2: Overview of Capability-Aligned Hierarchical Learning.

π(ak | sk ) that maps the state sk to a tool-use action ak , so as to maximize the expected cumulative
reward:
" T
#
X
k
max Eπ
γ R(sk , ak ) .
(1)

for the low-level executor to realize with the available tool schemas. Meanwhile, the executor may
fail to align with the planner’s underlying intent,
leading to misordered, incomplete, or redundant
tool invocations.

π

3

k=0

Problem Definition
4

In this paper, we study the problem of tool use,
where LLMs are required to accomplish userspecified tasks by invoking external tools. Formally, given a user query q and a predefined
set of available tools T = {t1 , t2 , . . . , tK },
the LLM must generate a sequence of actions
{a1 , a2 , . . . , ak }, where each ai can be either a
text response or a tool invocation.
According to previous works (Li et al., 2025;
Yu et al., 2025; Qian et al., 2025; Zeng et al.,
2025b), tool-use problem can be naturally formulated as a decision-making problem and defined as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) tuple M = (S, A, P, R, γ). S denotes the state
space. For a state sk at step k (sk ∈ S), it summarizes the user query q and the interaction history {(a1 , o1 ), (a2 , o2 ), . . . , (ak−1 , ok−1 )}, providing the necessary context for the model to select
appropriate tools. Here ok denotes the observations
returned by the executed tools at step k. A denotes
the action space. An action ak corresponds to either
invoking a tool tk ∈ T with specified arguments or
a text response (e.g., intermediate reasoning or a
final answer).
P denotes the transition function P(sk+1 |
sk , ak ), which transfers from state sk to sk+1 when
action ak is executed. R denotes reward R(sk , ak ),
is the feedback on task performance after executing action ak . γ denotes the discount factor, and
γ ∈ (0, 1] controls the relative importance of immediate versus future rewards. Under the MDP
formulation, given a state sk ,
the objective of tool use task is to learn a policy

Methodology

To address planner-executor misalignment in hierarchical tool learning, we propose CAHL in this
paper. As shown in Figure 2, CAHL is a hierarchical framework with a high-level planner and a
low-level executor. Unlike prior work, we jointly
optimize both policies using RLVR, encouraging
the planner to match its instruction granularity to
the executor’s capabilities, and the executor to align
its strategy with the planner’s intent. We next describe the high-level policy, the low-level policy,
and their joint optimization.
4.1

High-level policy

The high-level policy is designed to synthesize a
comprehensive execution plan Z in a single pass,
providing a global context that specifies the overall tool-use structure and intended execution flow.
Formally, given the user query q, available tool set
T , the high policy πh generates the global plan:
Z ∼ πh (· | q, T ),

(2)

where Z denotes the global plan, which is composed of an ordered sequence of k sub-tasks Z =
[z1 , z2 , . . . , zk ]. Each sub-task zk is a structured
instruction that encapsulates both the tool and the
corresponding argument filling:
zk = ⟨tk , {(p, vp ) | p ∈ Params(tk ), vp ← Extract(q)}⟩,
(3)

where tk ∈ T represents the selected tool for the
k-th step, and Params(tk ) denotes the set of required parameters for tool invocation tk . The value
3

where vp ⊆ Z denotes that the value string vp
appears as a substring within the generated plan
Z. I[·] is the indicator function, which outputs 1
when the generated arguments match the expected
values (e.g., specific city names or dates) prior to
final structured parsing, and 0 otherwise.
The execution-level reward assesses the correctness of the generated plan based on its induced execution trajectory. Specifically, given
a global plan Z, the low-level policy follows
this plan and produces an execution trajectory
τ = {a1 , a2 , . . . , ak }, where each element aj
corresponds to either a concrete tool invocation
or a natural language output at step j. The
execution-level reward is defined as the average
step-wise alignment between the generated execution trajectory and the ground-truth sequence
G = {g1 , g2 , . . . , gn }:

vp signifies the specific argument value extracted
directly from the user query q. Notably, the parameters specified by the high-level policy are not fixed:
during local execution, they may be adaptively refined based on the actual tool feedback returned at
previous steps.
4.2

Low-level Policy

The low-level policy is designed to execute individual tool invocation conditioned on the tool specification, intended arguments provided by the highlevel policy, and the actual feedback from previous
execution steps. It refines the tool arguments when
necessary, performs the corresponding tool invocation, and returns the execution result to update the
interaction state. Specifically, the low-level policy
πl is formulated as:
ak ∼ πl (· | F1:k , zk , T ),

(4)
k

where F1:k denotes the feedbacks of the previous
k − 1 execution steps. ak denotes the final executable output generated by the low-level policy,
which can be either (1) reasoning text (e.g., intermediate thoughts or a final answer), or (2) a
tool invocation formatted as a code snippet or a
machine-readable JSON object.
4.3

R(h,exe) =

(7)

j=1

Here Score(aj , gj ) is computed based on the
alignment between the executed action produced by
the low-level policy and the corresponding groundtruth. If both aj and gj correspond to tool invocations, and the executed tool name and all associated
argument values in aj exactly match those specified in gj , Score(aj , gj ) is set to 1; If both aj and
gj are natural language responses (e.g., intermediate reasoning traces or final answers), Score(aj , gj )
is defined as the semantic similarity between the
two outputs. In all other cases, such as action
type mismatch or structurally invalid executions,
Score(aj , gj ) is set to 0. That is:

Joint Optimization via RLVR

To align the high-level policy’s planning granularity with the low-level policy’s execution capabilities, we design a series of verifiable rewards for
each policy and jointly optimize both policies with
GRPO (Shao et al., 2024).
High-level Reward. The high-level reward Rh
evaluates whether the generated plan leads to accurate parameter inference and correct execution
behavior under the given context. Specifically, the
high-level reward is defined as
Rh = R(h,param) + R(h,exe) ,

1X
Score(aj , gj ).
k



if gj ∈ Atool ,
I[aj = gj ],
Score(aj , gj ) = CosSim(aj , gj ), if gj ∈ Atext ,

0,
otherwise.

(8)

By grounding the high-level reward in the actual
execution of the low-level policy, this executionaware design enables effective feedback from lowlevel execution outcomes to high-level planning.
As a result, the planner is encouraged to generate
global plans that are not only structurally valid but
also well-aligned with the execution capabilities
of the low-level policy and the ultimate tool-use
objective.

(5)

where R(h,param) is the parameter-level reward, and
R(h,exe) is the execution-level reward.
The parameter-level reward R(h,param) evaluates
whether the high-level policy can extract correct
argument from the provided context. Suppose the
V denotes the set of all argument values contained
within these ground truth tool invocations, the parameter reward is defined by:
X
R(h,param) =
I(vp ⊆ Z),
(6)

Low-level Reward.
ward is defined as:

Formally, the low-level re-

Rl = R(l,form) + R(l,syn) + R(l,sem) ,

vp ∈V

4

(9)

where R(l,form) denotes the format-level reward
that evaluates structural validity, R(l,syn) denotes
the syntax-level reward that assesses schema compliance, and R(l,sem) denotes the semantic-level
reward that measures semantic correctness.
The format-level reward is a binary reward,
which verifies whether the generated output ak contains all required special tokens (e.g., XML tags)
in the strict order specified by the prompt.

by the model that corresponds to the ground-truth
tool invocation gj .
(3) Parameter value: we check whether the argument values are exactly matched,

rv =

X 

I Valuegj [p] = Valuet(gj ) [p] ,

(14)

gj ∈G

where p is the parameter’s name. Valuegj [p] and
Valuet(gj ) [p] denote the values of parameter p in
the ground-truth tool invocation gj and the modelgenerated tool invocation t(gj ), respectively. I[·] is
the indicator function.

(
1,
R(l,form) =
0,

all tokens present and ordered,
otherwise.
(10)
The syntax-level reward evaluates whether the
parameters in the generated output ak strictly adhere to the predefined tool schema, including the
correctness of argument structure and compliance
with data type constraints. Specifically, for a tool
invocation tk in ak , we employ a validation function to verify if the parameter p of tool invocation
tk conforms to the structure and data types defined
in the tool environment’s schema: if no tool call is
detected, the reward is 0; If tool calls are present
and all extracted arguments pass the schema validation, the reward is 1; otherwise, the reward is -1.
That is:

Model training. We optimize both high-level
policy and low-level policy with GRPO (Shao et al.,
2024). Specifically, for each input query q, the highlevel policy πh samples a group of n candidate
global plans, denoted as Z = {Z (1) , . . . , Z (n) }.
Each plan Z (i) is parsed into a sequence of subtasks
Z (i) = [z1 , z2 , . . . , zk ]. The high-level trainer
waits until the low-level executor completes the
entire sequence. Upon completion, it evaluates the
(1)
(2)
(n)
comprehensive rewards {Rh , Rh , ..., Rh } via
Eq. (5). The policy πh is then optimized based
on the group advantage derived from the reward
distribution within Z (i) :
h 

i
(i)
Lh (θh ) = −EZ (i) ∼πh A Z (i) , Rh log πh Z (i) | q; T ,


0,
if at contains no tool invocation,



R(l,syn) = 1,
if ∀p ∈ Params(tk ), p is valid in schema,



−1, otherwise.
(11)

(i)
where A(Z (i) , Rh ) denotes the group advantage
of Z (i) .

The semantic-level reward, conditioned on
valid formatting, measures the semantic alignment between the predicted tool invocation T ′ =
{t1 , t2 , ..., tk } and the ground-truth invocation G =
{g1 , . . . , gn }. Specifically, we focus on:
(1) Tool name: we measure whether the intersection over union (IoU) of selected tool names,

For a task zi specified by the global plan Z, the
low-policy πl sample a group of execution Ai =
(i)
(i)
{a1 , . . . , am }. Upon the tool of each generated
output executed, we compute the corresponding
(1)
(2)
(m)
instant rewards {Rl , Rl , ..., Rl } of the lowlevel policy via Eq. (9). The low-level policy is
then optimized with:

rn =

|NG ∩ NT′ |
∈ [0, 1],
|NG ∪ NT′ |

(15)

(12)

h 


i
(i)
(j)
(i)
Ll (θl ) = −Ea(i) ∼π A aj , Rl
log πl aj | F1:i , zi , T ,
j

where NG and NT′ are the sets of tool names in G
and T ′ .
(2) Parameter name: we measure if the correct
arguments are identified,
rp =

X |Params(gj ) ∩ Params(t(gj ))|
gj ∈G

|Params(gj ) ∪ Params(t(gj ))|



(i)

l

(j)

where A aj , Rl



(16)
denotes the group advantage

(i)

of aj . The training details of CAHL are illustrated
in Algorithm 1.

, (13)

5

Experiments

We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the
performance of CAHL, focusing on the following
research questions: (i) Is CAHL more effective

where Params(·) represents the set of parameter
names. t(gj ) denotes the tool invocation produced
5

Table 1: Main results across BFCL, API-Bank, and Bamboogle. Best and second-best performances are highlighted
in bold and underlined. In BFCL, Relevance evaluates whether the model correctly determines if tool use is required
for a given query, while Irrelevance measures whether the model can correctly avoid unnecessary tool invocations
when no tool is needed. “–” indicates that the corresponding Bamboogle result is unavailable because we could not
find public checkpoints for Tool-N1 and ToolSample to reproduce the evaluation under the same setting.
Benchmark

Metric

Qwen EASYTool TUMIX Tool-N1 ToolRL ToolSample CAHL

Overall Acc
Non-Live AST
Live Acc
Multi Turn
Relevance
Irrelevance

47.68
68.98
63.31
8.88
72.22
71.93

36.39
59.50
50.26
0.75
88.89
44.00

58.52
84.36
74.26
16.71
88.89
79.16

53.91
77.57
73.39
10.00
77.78
77.85

56.96
85.21
73.39
13.25
83.33
75.87

60.25
86.42
76.85
18.50
83.33
78.44

61.10
87.37
78.31
18.75
83.33
79.43

API-Bank

Overall
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3

58.29
65.4
43.3
44.3

54.61
61.15
35.82
44.27

73.70
76.19
53.73
76.34

60.47
70.7
46.3
36.6

61.81
72.2
56.7
32.8

64.99
73.2
65.7
39.7

75.54
81.7
64.2
62.6

Bamboogle

Accuracy

69.6

68.8

73.6

-

72.0

-

75.2

5.2

Baselines

BFCL

than existing methods (RQ1)? (ii) How does joint
optimization affect overall performance (RQ2)?
(iii) Can CAHL perform tool use more efficiently
and reliably than baseline methods (RQ3)? (iv)
Does CAHL effectively mitigate planner-executor
misalignment (RQ4)? Additional evaluations, including training convergence and computational
cost analysis, are provided in the Appendix A.5
and Appendix A.6.
5.1

We compare CAHL with six representative baselines ranging from foundational models to state-ofthe-art tool-use frameworks: Qwen-2.5-Instruct
(Qwen et al., 2025), Tool-N1 (Zhang et al., 2025b),
ToolRL (Qian et al., 2025), ToolSample (Feng
et al., 2025), EASYTool (Yuan et al., 2025), and
TUMIX (Chen et al., 2025). Detailed descriptions
and architectural configurations for each baseline
framework are provided in Appendix A.1.

Training and Evaluation
5.3

Training. Following ToolSample (Feng et al.,
2025), we adopt a 4,000-sample composite dataset
consisting of ToolACE (Liu et al., 2025), Hammer (Lin et al., 2024), and xLAM (Zhang et al.,
2025a). To support CAHL’s joint optimization, we
reorganize the original tool-use trajectories into
role-specific training instances: atomic execution
instances for the executor and trajectory-level planning targets for the planner. Further details are
provided in Appendix A.2.

Main Results (RQ1)

Table 1 shows that CAHL achieves the best overall
performance on the evaluated benchmarks while
remaining competitive across fine-grained metrics,
demonstrating its effectiveness in tool-use tasks.
On BFCL, CAHL achieves 61.10% overall accuracy, with the best performance on Non-Live
AST, Live Acc, Multi Turn, and Irrelevance. This
suggests that CAHL improves both schema-level
tool invocation and execution reliability. Although EASYTool and TUMIX obtain higher Relevance scores, Relevance mainly measures the preexecution decision of whether a tool call is needed,
rather than the correctness of the subsequent tooluse trajectory. In particular, EASYTool achieves
high Relevance but much lower Irrelevance, suggesting that it may be more inclined to trigger tool
calls even when they are unnecessary. In contrast,
CAHL achieves the best Irrelevance score while
also leading on execution-related metrics, indicating that it improves reliable tool execution without
encouraging excessive tool invocation.

Evaluation. To thoroughly assess the effectiveness of CAHL, we evaluate our method on three
representative benchmarks: the Berkeley Function
Calling Leaderboard (BFCL) (Yan et al., 2024) for
structural and functional correctness, API-Bank
(Li et al., 2023) for complex multi-turn interactive
tool-use, and Bamboogle (Press et al., 2023) for
unconstrained, multi-hop reasoning. The details of
benchmarks are discussed is provided in Appendix
A.3.
6

Single-level

LowOnly

FreezeLow

FreezeHigh

Ours

Overall
Non-live
Live
Multi
Rel.
Irrel.

56.96
85.21
73.39
13.25
83.33
75.87

59.24
85.19
76.02
20.52
77.78
67.03

50.34
72.81
65.66
11.37
83.33
71.22

53.30
76.50
66.62
15.25
72.22
77.72

61.10
87.37
78.31
18.75
83.33
79.43

73.03
80.20
68.66
53.44

75.54
81.70
64.18
62.60

 & R X Q W

BFCL

61.81
72.18
56.72
32.82

73.37
79.95
70.15
54.96

67.50
71.18
56.72
61.83

    

    

        
  

 7 R R O 5 /
     

 2 X U V
     
  
 

     

    
    

 

  D   $ Y J     7 R R O  & D O O V   E   , Q Y D O L G  7 R R O  & D O O V       F   5 H G X Q G D Q W  5 D W L R    

Figure 3: Efficiency and quality analysis on API-Bank.
CAHL reduces invalid tool invocations and redundant
execution loops.

stantially underperform CAHL on both BFCL and
API-Bank. This shows that optimizing only one
side of the hierarchy is insufficient: when either the
planner or the executor is frozen, the two components cannot fully adapt to each other’s capability
boundaries. In contrast, CAHL jointly optimizes
both components, enabling the planner to generate
more executable sub-tasks and the executor to better follow high-level intent; (2) the frozen variants
consistently underperform LowOnly, and they can
even fall below Single-level on BFCL. This indicates that simply introducing a hierarchical structure does not guarantee better tool use. If only the
executor is optimized while the high-level planner
is frozen, the executor may be constrained by mismatched high-level guidance, causing it to perform
worse than direct single-level inference; if only the
planner is optimized while the low-level executor
is frozen, the planner cannot benefit from reciprocal executor adaptation and may still generate
sub-tasks whose distribution or granularity is difficult for the executor to realize. Therefore, a jointly
optimized high-level planner is necessary; otherwise, hierarchical guidance can limit rather than
improve execution performance; (3) LowOnly outperforms Single-level on both benchmarks. Since
LowOnly uses the trained low-level executor alone
during inference, this result indicates that our training pipeline also strengthens the executor itself
beyond the single-level RL baseline. Overall, these
results show that CAHL’s gains do not come merely
from reinforcement learning or hierarchical decomposition alone, but from joint optimization that
aligns and improves both the planner and the executor.

On API-Bank, CAHL achieves 75.54% overall
accuracy, obtaining the best overall performance,
the best Level 1 result and strong Level 3 performance. Compared with ToolSample, CAHL
slightly trails on Level 2 but performs better on both
the overall benchmark and Level 3. Since ToolSample focuses on improving RL training through
dynamic sampling and curriculum learning, while
CAHL directly aligns high-level planning with lowlevel execution through joint optimization,
this suggests that joint optimization is especially
beneficial for tool-use tasks involving longer dependency chains and more complex multi-step execution.
CAHL underperform TUMIX on level 3, we
assume that is because TUMIX trades substantially
more inference turns and tokens for stronger multiagent deliberation and error correction.
Finally, on Bamboogle, CAHL reaches 75.2%
accuracy, outperforming other baselines. Since
Bamboogle evaluates final-answer correctness in
open-ended multi-hop QA with web search tools
rather than intermediate tool-call accuracy, this result suggests that CAHL generalizes well to openended tasks.
5.4

        
   

API-Bank
Overall
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3

   

 3 H U F H Q W D J H    

Metric

 4 Z H Q

 3 H U F H Q W D J H    

Table 2: Ablation results on BFCL and API-Bank.

Ablation Study (RQ2)

We evaluate four variants to examine the contribution of joint optimization: (i) Single-level
is a single-tier tool-use agent, i.e., ToolRL; (ii)
LowOnly uses the trained low-level executor alone
for inference, without invoking the high-level planner; (iii) FreezeLow freezes the low-level executor
and only optimizes the high-level planner; and (iv)
FreezeHigh freezes the high-level planner and only
optimizes the low-level executor.
Results in Table 2 provide three main observations: (1) both FreezeLow and FreezeHigh sub-

5.5

Efficiency and Quality Analysis (RQ3)

To evaluate execution efficiency and reliability, we
conduct a trajectory-level analysis on 150 randomly
sampled single turn API-Bank tasks without limit7

Table 3: Case study illustrating the mitigation of plannerexecutor misalignment. The decoupled baseline generates an overly abstract plan, causing the executor to drop
constraints and hallucinate parameters. CAHL enforces
strict parameter anchoring via an aligned planner.

ing the maximum number of tool calls. We report
three metrics: the average number of tool calls
per successful task, the invalid invocation rate, and
the redundant call ratio. Invalid invocations include
schema violations, incorrect parameters, and execution errors, while redundant calls refer to repeated
or unnecessary tool invocations. Lower values indicate more concise and reliable tool-use trajectories.
As shown in Figure 3, CAHL produces shorter
and more reliable execution trajectories: (1) CAHL
requires only 1.04 tool calls per successful task,
compared with 1.24 for ToolRL, indicating that it
completes tasks with fewer unnecessary actions.
(2) CAHL reduces the invalid invocation rate to
16.92%, substantially lower than Qwen (28.48%)
and ToolRL (30.49%), suggesting better schema
compliance and parameter grounding. (3) CAHL
lowers the redundant call ratio to 1.51%, compared
with 6.53% for Qwen and 11.89% for ToolRL,
showing that it is less likely to enter repetitive or
ineffective tool-use loops. Overall, these results
indicate that CAHL improves not only final task
performance but also the quality and efficiency of
intermediate tool execution.
5.6

Case Study: Mitigating Planner-Executor Misalignment
Context & User Goal:
• Detailed Goal: "I have been experiencing migraines. Please update my
medical profile to register this new symptom. My username is Jerry and the
required password is zxcvbn."
Current State: Symptom identified. Ready for profile update.
Remaining Task: Execute the highly-constrained PersonalInfoUpdate
API.
Decoupled Baseline Output:
[Untuned High-Level Plan]:
"Subtask: Update the user’s medical profile with the new symptom."
<tool_call>
{ "name": "PersonalInfoUpdate",
"parameters": { "username": "Jerry", "symptom": "migraine", "password":
"password123" } }
</tool_call>
[Critique]: Planner-Executor Misalignment & Hallucination
× Misalignment: The planner issues an overly abstract instruction, dropping
the critical password constraint.
× Hallucination: The executor, forced to complete the API schema without
guidance, hallucinates a fake password, causing a fatal API error.
Ours (CAHL) Output:
[Aligned High-Level Plan]:
"Subtask: Call PersonalInfoUpdate for username ’Jerry’ with symptom ’migraine’. Required authentication: password is ’zxcvbn’."
<think> Guided by the plan, I will inject the exact credentials... </think>
<tool_call>
{ "name": "PersonalInfoUpdate",
"parameters": { "username": "Jerry", "symptom": "migraine", "password":
"zxcvbn" } }
</tool_call>
[Analysis]: Capability-Aligned Execution
✓ Success: The co-optimized planner precisely matches the executor’s schema
needs, explicitly anchoring the strict constraints and preventing hallucination.

Case Study (RQ4)

To further analyze how CAHL addresses plannerexecutor misalignment, we conduct a case study
comparing CAHL with a decoupled hierarchical
baseline on the same constrained multi-step task.
As shown in Table 3, the decoupled baseline has
a planner and an executor, but they are not jointly
optimized. Its unaligned planner issues overly abstract instructions that drop critical constraints (e.g.,
passwords), while the executor, lacking sufficient
high-level guidance, hallucinates missing parameters to satisfy the API schema, leading to execution failure. In contrast, CAHL jointly optimizes
the planner and the executor: the planner anchors
required constraints and produces schema-aware
guidance, while the executor faithfully grounds this
guidance into valid tool calls. This case highlights
the importance of joint optimization for plannerexecutor alignment, where the planner must adapt
its instructions to the executor’s executable action
space and the executor must reliably realize the
planner’s intent during tool execution.

6

ment in hierarchical tool learning. CAHL jointly
optimizes a high-level planner and a low-level
executor with verifiable rewards, encouraging
planner-generated sub-tasks to match the executor’s actual tool-use capability, while enabling the
executor to adjust its strategy to match the planner’s intent. Experiments show that CAHL improves task performance and execution reliability
compared with strong baselines.

7

Limitations

The hierarchical design of CAHL, while beneficial
for complex tasks, introduces additional computational overhead compared to single-level agents.
Specifically, the mandatory high-level planning
stage before each low-level execution not only increases inference latency but also adds to the overall training cost. This reflects a fundamental tradeoff between computational efficiency and execution reliability: the overhead is essentially the price
paid for better handling of complex task in tool

Conclusion

We propose Capability-Aligned Hierarchical Learning (CAHL) to address planner-executor misalign8

usage. Future work could explore more efficient
planning strategies as well as asynchronous execution between planning and acting to mitigate this
overhead.

Bowen Jin, Hansi Zeng, Zhenrui Yue, Jinsung Yoon,
Sercan Arik, Dong Wang, Hamed Zamani, and Jiawei
Han. 2025. Search-r1: Training llms to reason and
leverage search engines with reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.09516.

References

Geunwoo Kim, Pierre Baldi, and Stephen McAleer.
2023. Language models can solve computer tasks.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
36:39648–39677.

Emre Can Acikgoz, Jeremiah Greer, Akul Datta,
Ze Yang, William Zeng, Oussama Elachqar, Emmanouil Koukoumidis, Dilek Hakkani-Tur, and
Gokhan Tur. 2025. Can a single model master both
multi-turn conversations and tool use? coalm: A
unified conversational agentic language model. In
Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 12370–12390.

Angeliki Lazaridou, Elena Gribovskaya, Wojciech
Stokowiec, and Nikolai Grigorev. 2022. Internetaugmented language models through few-shot
prompting for open-domain question answering.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.05115.
Minghao Li, Yingxiu Zhao, Bowen Yu, Feifan Song,
Hangyu Li, Haiyang Yu, Zhoujun Li, Fei Huang,
and Yongbin Li. 2023. Api-bank: A comprehensive
benchmark for tool-augmented llms. In Proceedings
of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 3102–3116.

Yongchao Chen, Jiefeng Chen, Rui Meng, Ji Yin,
Na Li, Chuchu Fan, Chi Wang, Tomas Pfister, and
Jinsung Yoon. 2025. Tumix: Multi-agent testtime scaling with tool-use mixture. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2510.01279.

Xuefeng Li, Haoyang Zou, and Pengfei Liu. 2025.
Torl: Scaling tool-integrated rl. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.23383.

Zehui Chen, Kuikun Liu, Qiuchen Wang, Wenwei
Zhang, Jiangning Liu, Dahua Lin, Kai Chen, and
Feng Zhao. 2024. Agent-flan: Designing data and
methods of effective agent tuning for large language
models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics ACL 2024, pages 9354–9366.

Qiqiang Lin, Muning Wen, Qiuying Peng, Guanyu
Nie, Junwei Liao, Jun Wang, Xiaoyun Mo, Jiamu
Zhou, Cheng Cheng, Yin Zhao, and 1 others. 2024.
Hammer: Robust function-calling for on-device language models via function masking. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.04587.

Tianzhe Chu, Yuexiang Zhai, Jihan Yang, Shengbang Tong, Saining Xie, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V
Le, Sergey Levine, and Yi Ma. 2025. Sft memorizes, rl generalizes: A comparative study of
foundation model post-training. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.17161.

Weiwen Liu, Xu Huang, Xingshan Zeng, Shuai Yu,
Dexun Li, Shuai Wang, Weinan Gan, Zhengying Liu,
Yuanqing Yu, Zezhong WANG, and 1 others. 2025.
Toolace: Winning the points of llm function calling. In The Thirteenth International Conference on
Learning Representations.

Chris Cummins, Volker Seeker, Dejan Grubisic, Baptiste Roziere, Jonas Gehring, Gabriel Synnaeve, and
Hugh Leather. 2025. Llm compiler: Foundation language models for compiler optimization. In Proceedings of the 34th ACM SIGPLAN International
Conference on Compiler Construction, pages 141–
153.

Bhargavi Paranjape, Scott Lundberg, Sameer Singh,
Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Luke Zettlemoyer, and
Marco Tulio Ribeiro. 2023. Art: Automatic multistep reasoning and tool-use for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.09014.

Zihao Feng, Xiaoxue Wang, Bowen Wu, Hailong Cao,
Tiejun Zhao, Qun Yu, and Baoxun Wang. 2025. Toolsample: Dual dynamic sampling methods with curriculum learning for rl-based tool learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2509.14718.

Shishir G Patil, Tianjun Zhang, Xin Wang, and Joseph E
Gonzalez. 2024. Gorilla: Large language model
connected with massive apis. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 37:126544–126565.
Archiki Prasad, Alexander Koller, Mareike Hartmann,
Peter Clark, Ashish Sabharwal, Mohit Bansal, and
Tushar Khot. 2024. Adapt: As-needed decomposition and planning with language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
NAACL 2024, pages 4226–4252.

Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao
Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, and 1 others. 2025.
Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in
llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.12948.

Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt,
Noah A Smith, and Mike Lewis. 2023. Measuring
and narrowing the compositionality gap in language
models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pages 5687–5711.

Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan
Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
Weizhu Chen, and 1 others. 2022. Lora: Low-rank
adaptation of large language models. ICLR, 1(2):3.

9

Cheng Qian, Emre Can Acikgoz, Qi He, Hongru Wang,
Xiusi Chen, Dilek Hakkani-Tür, Gokhan Tur, and
Heng Ji. 2025. Toolrl: Reward is all tool learning
needs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.13958.

models. In The eleventh international conference on
learning representations.
Yuanqing Yu, Zhefan Wang, Weizhi Ma, Shuai Wang,
Chuhan Wu, Zhiqiang Guo, and Min Zhang. 2025.
Steptool: Enhancing multi-step tool usage in llms via
step-grained reinforcement learning. In Proceedings
of the 34th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, pages 3952–
3962.

Yujia Qin, Shengding Hu, Yankai Lin, Weize Chen,
Ning Ding, Ganqu Cui, Zheni Zeng, Xuanhe Zhou,
Yufei Huang, Chaojun Xiao, and 1 others. 2024a.
Tool learning with foundation models. ACM Computing Surveys, 57(4):1–40.
Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan
Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru Tang,
Bill Qian, and 1 others. 2024b. Toolllm: Facilitating
large language models to master 16000+ real-world
apis. In The Twelfth International Conference on
Learning Representations.

Siyu Yuan, Kaitao Song, Jiangjie Chen, Xu Tan,
Yongliang Shen, Kan Ren, Dongsheng Li, and Deqing Yang. 2025. Easytool: Enhancing llm-based
agents with concise tool instruction. In Proceedings
of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume
1: Long Papers), pages 951–972.

Qwen, :, An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang,
Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan
Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan
Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin
Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, and 25 others. 2025. Qwen2.5 technical report. Preprint,
arXiv:2412.15115.

Aohan Zeng, Mingdao Liu, Rui Lu, Bowen Wang, Xiao
Liu, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. 2024. Agenttuning: Enabling generalized agent abilities for llms. In
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024, pages 3053–3077.

Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta
Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2023.
Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves
to use tools. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:68539–68551.

Yirong Zeng, Xiao Ding, Yutai Hou, Yuxian Wang,
Li Du, Juyi Dai, Qiuyang Ding, Duyu Tang, Dandan
Tu, Weiwen Liu, and 1 others. 2025a. Tool zero:
Training tool-augmented llms via pure rl from scratch.
In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: EMNLP 2025, pages 9135–9147.

Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu,
Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan
Zhang, YK Li, and 1 others. 2024. Deepseekmath:
Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300.

Yirong Zeng, Xiao Ding, Yuxian Wang, Weiwen Liu,
Yutai Hou, Wu Ning, Xu Huang, Duyu Tang, Dandan
Tu, Bing Qin, and 1 others. 2025b. itool: Reinforced
fine-tuning with dynamic deficiency calibration for
advanced tool use. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 13901–13916.

Lei Wang, Wanyu Xu, Yihuai Lan, Zhiqiang Hu, Yunshi
Lan, Roy Ka-Wei Lee, and Ee-Peng Lim. 2023. Planand-solve prompting: Improving zero-shot chain-ofthought reasoning by large language models. In Proceedings of the 61st annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (volume 1: long
papers), pages 2609–2634.

Jianguo Zhang, Tian Lan, Ming Zhu, Zuxin Liu, Thai
Hoang, Shirley Kokane, Weiran Yao, Juntao Tan,
Akshara Prabhakar, Haolin Chen, and 1 others. 2025a.
xlam: A family of large action models to empower ai
agent systems. In NAACL (Long Papers).

Yihong Wu, Liheng Ma, Lei Ding, Muzhi Li, Xinyu
Wang, Kejia Chen, Zhan Su, Zhanguang Zhang,
Chenyang Huang, Yingxue Zhang, and 1 others.
2025. It takes two: Your grpo is secretly dpo. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2510.00977.

Shaokun Zhang, Yi Dong, Jieyu Zhang, Jan Kautz,
Bryan Catanzaro, Andrew Tao, Qingyun Wu, Zhiding
Yu, and Guilin Liu. 2025b. Nemotron-research-tooln1: Exploring tool-using language models with reinforced reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.00024.

Binfeng Xu, Zhiyuan Peng, Bowen Lei, Subhabrata
Mukherjee, Yuchen Liu, and Dongkuan Xu. 2023.
Rewoo: Decoupling reasoning from observations for
efficient augmented language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.18323.

A

Appendix

A.1

Detailed Baseline Descriptions

Fanjia Yan, Huanzhi Mao, Charlie Cheng-Jie Ji, Tianjun
Zhang, Shishir G Patil, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E Gonzalez. 2024. Berkeley function calling leaderboard.

To provide a comprehensive benchmark context for
resolving planner-executor misalignment, we delineate the architectural and optimization characteristics of the six baselines referenced in Section 5.2:

Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak
Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2022.
React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language

• Qwen-2.5-7B-Instruct (Qwen et al., 2025)
serves as our foundational backbone model. It
10

is heavily instruction-tuned for general promptfollowing across multi-turn user intent tracking but operates without targeted parametric
enforcement for fine-grained tool schema restrictions.

the KL regularization term of GRPO, and set the
generation temperature to 1.0. Models are initialized from Qwen-2.5-Instruct-7B and fine-tuned in a
parameter-efficient manner using LoRA (Hu et al.,
2022) with a rank of 16, with acceleration provided
by the Unsloth library2 . The details of our prompts
are shown in Appendix Figure 5.

• Tool-N1 (Zhang et al., 2025b) utilizes an early
reinforcement learning baseline that optimizes
tool operations through sparse binary rewards
derived exclusively from final environment execution outcomes, lacking intermediate processoriented step supervision.

A.3

We conduct evaluations on three widely used benchmarks to assess both atomic tool invocation accuracy and long-horizon tool-use performance: BFCL
V3 (Yan et al., 2024) and API-Bank (Li et al.,
2023), we show the statistics of the two benchmarks in table 4 and table 5.
API-Bank targets more complex, multi-step tooluse scenarios, where models must interact with
multiple APIs over long horizons to complete structured tasks. The benchmark categorizes tasks into
three levels based on interaction complexity. We
evaluate model performance using overall accuracy
and report results separately on Level 1, Level 2,
and Level 3, corresponding to single-step API calls,
multi-step API interactions with simple dependencies, and long-horizon, multi-API tool-use with
complex dependencies, respectively. API-Bank
evaluates multi-turn planning and reasoning with
an average of 2.91 turns per dialogue, it predominantly features single-call turns (363) over multicall turns (122).
BFCL V3 focuses on individual tool invocation
under strict function schemas, targeting precise argument selection and compliance with the required
format. On this benchmark, we report overall accuracy as well as a set of fine-grained accuracy-based
metrics that evaluate different invocation scenarios, including non-live AST accuracy (structural
and argument-level correctness for non-live calls),
live accuracy (execution success for live APIs),
multi-Turn accuracy (correctness over multi-turn
interactions), relevance detection (identifying when
a tool call is required), and irrelevance detection
(identifying when no tool call is needed).
Bamboogle is a representative multi-hop question answering benchmark for evaluating free-form
tool use in open-ended QA scenarios. Unlike BFCL
and API-Bank, it does not evaluate the correctness
of intermediate tool invocations or impose strict
constraints on tool-call parameters. Instead, models are equipped with a web search tool and evalu-

• ToolRL (Qian et al., 2025) introduces an advanced GRPO-based optimization framework
that incorporates dense, structural, and semantic reward parameters to penalize formatting
errors during sequential tool invocations. However, it operates purely as a single-level policy
under intense long-context input dilution.
• ToolSample (Feng et al., 2025) enhances
ToolRL by introducing dynamic curriculum
training paths and specialized sequence difficulty samplers to prioritize complex and borderline execution trajectories during policy adaptation.
• EASYTool (Yuan et al., 2025) structures a
prompt-engineered hierarchical workflow that
manually orchestrates problem-solving boundaries into disconnected multi-agent planning
and grounding steps. It performs inference
without joint backpropagation parameter cooptimization.
• TUMIX (Chen et al., 2025) represents a complex multi-agent framework that implements
iterative consensus loops to execute test-time
computation expansion. While proficient at error correction, its multiple conversation turns
incur extreme scaling overhead and latency
costs.
A.2

Implementation Details

We train our CAHL models using the TRL framework1 , a reinforcement learning framework for language models, on 2 NVIDIA A40 GPUs for 15
epochs. To encourage policy exploration, following (Wu et al., 2025), we generate 2 responses
per query in high-level policy training and 4 responses per query in low-level policy training, omit
1

Experiment Details

2

https://github.com/huggingface/trl

11

https://github.com/unslothai/unsloth

 ( [ H F  5 H Z D U G
 6 H P  5 H Z D U G
 6 X E  P H W U L F V  6 F R U H
 7 R W D O  5 H Z D U G

 + L J K  / H Y H O  7 R W D O
 / R Z  / H Y H O  7 R W D O
   

 7 R W D O  5 H Z D U G

    

Table 4: Statistics of the API-Bank Evaluation
Set.

   

    

   

    

 

    

     

 7 U D L Q L Q J  6 W H S V

   

      

                 

 7 U D L Q L Q J  6 W H S V

VALUE

D OMAINS C OVERED
T OTAL API S
T OTAL D IALOGUES
T OTAL T URNS
AVG . T URNS

8
73
314
914
2.91

Turn Breakdown:
S INGLE -C ALL
M ULTI -C ALL
R ETRIEVE +C ALL
P LAN +R ETRIEVE

363
122
50
50

Figure 4: The convergence of high-level and low-level
rewards.

in Figure 4. We observe a coarse-to-fine learning pattern: the high-level policy stabilizes earlier,
reaching a relatively high reward within 12,000
steps, while the low-level executor continues to
improve over a longer training horizon of about
60,000 steps.
This pattern is consistent with the different roles
of the two policies. The high-level planner mainly
learns to produce executable sub-task decompositions with appropriate granularity, while the lowlevel executor must further learn schema-compliant
tool invocation, argument grounding, and feedbackconditioned execution. Therefore, the early stabilization of the planner provides a more consistent
planning distribution, allowing the executor to refine its tool-use behavior under more stable highlevel guidance. This supports the central motivation of CAHL: joint optimization helps the planner
and executor gradually adapt to each other’s capabilities, rather than optimizing them in isolation.
We also observe a transient decrease in the lowlevel total reward around 25,000 steps. This may
reflect a temporary adaptation phase, where the
executor adjusts to more structured and constraintaware plans produced by the increasingly stable
high-level policy. After this phase, the low-level
reward continues to improve, suggesting that the
executor gradually learns to ground high-level intent into executable tool calls.

Table 5: Breakdown of the BFCL Benchmark.

A.4

   

    

  E   / R Z  / H Y H O  5 H Z D U G V

  D   + L J K  / H Y H O  5 H Z D U G V
S TATISTIC

 3 D U D P  5 H Z D U G
 6 \ Q  5 H Z D U G

C ATEGORY

D IM .

C OUNT P URPOSE

N ON -L IVE

AST
I RREL .

1,150
240

S YNTAX
H ALLUC .

L IVE

AST
R EL .
I RREL .

1,351
18
882

E XEC .
S ELECT
H ALLUC .

M ULTI -T URN D IAL .

800

R EASON

The Training of CAHL.

Algorithm 1 The Training of CAHL.
1: Input: User Query q, Tool Set T , Policies

πh , πl
2: Z ← (πh (· | q, T ), n)
3: for Z (i) in Z do

F1 ← {q}
[z1 , . . . , zm ] ← Parse(Z (i) )
6:
for zk in [z1 , . . . , zm ] do
7:
Ak ← (πl (· | F1:k , zk , T ), m)
8:
Calculate reward Rl according to Eq. (9)
9:
πl ← GRPO Update(Ak , Rl )
10:
a∗ ← SelectBest(Ak )
11:
F1:k ← UpdateHistory(F1:k , zk , a∗ )
12:
end for
(i)
13:
Calculate reward Rh according to Eq. (5)
14: end for
(i)
15: πh ← GRPO Update(Z, {Rh }n
i=1 )
4:
5:

Table 6: Cost comparison. Multiple and Single denote
multi-turn and single-turn dialogue scenarios, respectively. Both training and testing are performed on an
NVIDIA A40 (48GB). Time is measured in seconds (s).

Testing

A.5

 6 X E  P H W U L F V  6 F R U H

ated by final answer accuracy. This goal-oriented
setting requires the model to decide when to search,
interpret retrieved evidence, and synthesize the final answer across multiple reasoning steps.

Reward Analysis

To analyze how CAHL learns reliable tool use, we
visualize the rewards of the high-level planner and
the low-level executor during training, as shown

Training

Method

Multiple (s)

Single (s)

VRAM (GB)

VRAM (GB)

ToolRL
Ours

7.79
13.21

4.44
7.21

19.16
19.50

15
36†

† Includes 21GB (high-level policy) and 15GB (low-level policy).

12

A.6

Computational Cost Analysis

Although our method achieves strong performance
on the benchmark, the hierarchical architecture inevitably introduces additional memory consumption and inference latency. We compare CAHL
with ToolRL in terms of GPU memory usage and
inference time, and the results are reported in Table
6. As shown in Table 6, the inference latency for
multi-turn tasks increases to 13.21s (compared to
7.79s for ToolRL). This is an expected result of
our sequential two-step inference process, which
generates a high-level plan before low-level execution. However, thanks to our efficient LoRA
implementation, the additional memory overhead
during inference is negligible, with VRAM usage
remaining comparable to the baseline (19.50GB vs.
19.16GB). In contrast, the training memory consumption approximately doubles (36GB vs. 15GB),
reflecting the resource requirements for simultaneously optimizing two policies. Despite this overhead, the additional cost is a reasonable trade-off
for the substantial improvements in execution reliability and reduction of invalid tool calls, which
are critical for real-world tool-use applications. Notably, the overhead mainly stems from the hierarchical decision process, and can be further optimized
through model compression or context compression strategies. In practice, reliable tool execution is often more critical than marginal inference
speedups, making this trade-off acceptable in many
real-world scenarios.

13

High Level Planner Prompt
# Role
You are an Expert Task Decomposition Engine. Your goal is to map complex natural language requests into a strictly ordered list of atomic
executable steps.
# Core Philosophy & Requirements
1. **Atomic Decomposition**: Break the user request into logical, sequential sub-tasks.
2. **Parameter-Driven Description**: For each sub-task, assume there is an underlying tool. You must:
- Identify the implicit tool.
- **Traverse the tool's parameters** to ensure no detail is missed.
- Synthesize a natural language sentence that explicitly mentions the values or context for every necessary parameter.
3. **Natural Language Only**: The output must be a plain English sentence describing the action and its data. **Do not** include tool
names, function calls, variable assignments, or symbols like `->`.
4. **Format**: Output **ONLY** valid JSON.
# Output Schema
```json
{
"Tasks": [
"Description of step 1 including all relevant parameter values",
"Description of step 2 including all relevant parameter values"
]
}

Low Level Executor Prompt
# Role
You are a helpful multi-turn dialogue assistant acting as an **Executor**. Your primary function is to leverage available tools to solve user
tasks or provide direct responses when tools are unnecessary.
# Available Tools
{tools}
# Workflow
1. **Analyze**: Recall context and determine the user's immediate goal.
2. **Decide**:
- If a tool is needed: Construct the tool call with precise parameters.
- If NO tool is needed: Formulate a direct text response.
3. **Refine**: Apply data transformation and merge parameters if necessary.
# Output Format
You must output a **SINGLE** block. Do not output both a tool call and a response in the same turn.
**Option 1: Tool Call (JSON)**
```plaintext
<think>
Reasoning on why this tool is selected and how parameters are derived.
</think>
<tool_call>
{json_string}
</tool_call>
```
**Option 2: Direct Response (Text)**
```plaintext
<think>
Reasoning on why no tool is needed (e.g., chit-chat, clarification, or answering from memory).
</think>
<response>
Your natural language response here.
</response>
```

Figure 5: High-Level Planner Prompt & Low-Level Executor Prompt.

14

